T.T.D. Religious Publications Series No. 997
Price :

SIVA PURANAM
- D.S.R. Anjaneyulu

Published by Sri L.V. Subrahmanyam, I.A.S., Executive Officer,
T.T.Devasthanams, Tirupati and Printed at T.T.D. Press, Tirupati.

Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams
Tirupati

SIVA PURANAM

D.S.R. Anjaneyulu

Published by

Executive Officer
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams, Tirupati.
2013

SIVA PURANAM
by
D.S.R. ANJANEYULU

T.T.D. Religious Publications Series No.997

©All Rights Reserved
First Edition: 2013
Copies:

Published by
L.V. SUBRAHMANYAM, I.A.S.

Executive Officer
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams
Tirupati

D.T.P.
Office of the Editor-in-Chief
T.T.D., Tirupati

Printed at
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams Press
Tirupati - 517 507

FOREWORD
In Hindu faith there is godly Trinity, Brahma-VishnuMaheswara. They have universal duties as Srishti, Sthiti and Laya,
that is, Creation, Protection and Obsorption respectively. Maheswara
is Siva and also known as Sankara, Gowri Sankara and by many
other names.
The onus of Siva is destruction which might seem to be
unpleasant but very significant in Nature, Biology and Science. Unless
the old is ended new can not arise. So life and death commonly go
together and that is the law of life.
Ancient scriptures such as Puranas are the sole resort for selfabsorption, and dedication. And the whole grip of devotion is
engraved in trusted faith. Reading of Puranas inculcates such solid
and undisturbed faith in self and in the Supreme.
The Hindu structure of religion is founded on the ground of
Puranas in particular. The Puranas are widely spread as documents
of different Hindu religious sects.
Siva puranam is an Indian Epic of Lord Siva narrating number
of devine tales of mystic nature. The Saivite stories are very
interesting, innovative, idealistic, devotional and guidelines to human
beings. Above all they indicate triumph of the right over the wicked.
This book is brought out for the benefit of the wide spread
English readers. The author Sri D.S.R. Anjaneyulu has rendered
these stories in lucid, readable and versatile language.
As an aroma of Hindu religious fervour, T.T.D. has taken up
this work with the spirit of greatly said Hari Hara mantra as,

AUTHOR’S FOREWORD

“ Sivaya Vishnurupaya
Sivarupaya Vishnave”.
I hope that this great book will go a long way to infuse blend
of spiritual harmony among all devotees.
Tirupati

There flourishes the Ekasila town, in the Siddhavatam Taluk in
the Cuddapah district. The golden vessels entrenched on the towers
of the temple of Rama, Sita and Lakshmana, in that pilgrim centre,
otherwise known as ‘Onti Mitta’, beckoned to me.

In the Service of the Lord

Taking the sacred dip in the ‘Rama Tirtha’ lake, I paid my
reverential respects to the shining idols of Rama, Sita and
Lakshmana, in the sanctum sanctorum built by king Vasumanta.

L.V. Subrahmanyam, I.A.S.
Executive Officer,

As I offered my worship and received the sacrament from the
priest, I felt the mystic presence of Lord Rama commanding me to
write the ‘Siva Puranamu’. There and then I decided to compose
this work and offer it to Lord Rama.

10-2-2013

Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams

Of the eighteen Puranas, the Sivapuranam, revels in matchless
revelation of the non-sectarian nature of the omniscient, omnipotent
and omnipresent state of Lord Siva.
Although I consulted the Sanskrit original text containing 24000
slokas and eleven chapters, I adapted it independently the most
intelligible method of narration. Besides the original work, the ‘Siva
Puranamu’ of the late Sri Naga Virayya Sastri helped me a great
deal.
I tried my best to make the narration readable.
The first Part includes the wedding of Parvati and of Valli; the
second, the glory of Visvesvara and the tales of various devotees
of Lord Siva.
In offering this humble work to the reading public I hope to
promote not only the worship of Lord Siva but also the innate
consciousness of godhead in all human beings. In the fatherhood of
God is the best promotion of brotherhood of man.
D.S.R. ANJANEYULU

Dedication
This work is dedicated
to
LORD KODANDA RAMA
SWAMI
who is the central deity, on either side of whom stand his spouse
Sita Devi and his brother Lakshmana, in the temple at ‘OntiMitta’;
in whose service Hanuman and other monkey heroes felt their lives
sanctified; to whom Lord Siva offered his worship as ‘Onti Mitta
Ramalinga; seeking whose constant ‘darshan’ Hanuman resides there
as Sanjivaraya; praying to whom, the sage Sringi was released from
the sin of imprecating king Parikshit; whose resplendent image has
been all through the ages worshipped by the deities, Balarama and
Krishna, the sages and saints like Ramanujacharya, Krishna
Chaitanya and the poets like Potana and Ayyalaraju Ramabhadra;
and who is celebrated in legend and song as the symbol of supreme
godhead as well as of the immanent and transcendent spirit of the
sacred symbol, AUM.

Karamchedu
23-6-1983

D.S.R.ANJANEYULU

SIVA PURANAM
(EPIC OF LORD SIVA)
Prayer to Lord Siva
(in the form of acronym)
Nagendra-haraya Trilochanaya Bhasmanga-ragaya,
Mahesvaraya,
Nityaya Suddhaya Digambaraya tasmai Na-Karaya,
NAMAH SIVAYA.
Mandakini-salila-chandana-charchitaya
Nandisvara-pramatha-natha Mahesvaraya,
Mandara-mukhya-bahu-pushpa-supujitaya
Tasmai Ma-Karaya NAMAH SIVAYA.
Sivaya Gauri-vadanabja-brinda
Suryaya-Daksha-adhvara-nasakaya
Sri Nila-Kanthaya,Vrishadhwajaya
Tasmai Si-Karaya NAMAH SIVAYA.
Vasistha-Kumbhodbhava-Gautama-adi
Munindra Devarchita Sekharaya
Chandra-Arka-Vaisvanara-lochanaya
Tasmai Va-karaya NAMAH SIVAYA
Yaksha-svarupaya jata-dharaya
Pinaka-hastaya Sanatanaya,
Divyaya Devaya Digambaraya
Tasmai Ya-Karaya NAMAH SIVAYA.

Prayer to Lord Vishnu
SuklaambaradharamVishnum Sasivarnam Chaturbhujam,
prasanna-vadanam dhyayet sarva-vighna-upasantaye,

Prayer to Vighneswara
Vakra-tunda-maha-kaaya, surya-koti-sama-prabha,
Avighnam kuru me Deva, Sarva-karyeshu sarvada.

3

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

PART - I

SAGE SUTA

HIMALAYAS

The disciple of Sage Vyasa, Suta, is presently coming down
from the heavenly region to witness the holy sacrifice being
collectively performed by the Sages. As they looked up they saw
the all-knowing, smiling, merciful reciter of the epics fully bedecked
with the holy ashes and the rosary coming up to them, with this
prayer on his lips:

There!
Over there are the heaven-caressing towers of the mighty,
majestic Himalayas! Their very sight brings about a blissful
transformation in the minds of even the sinfully fallen men and women.
From the heights of those Himalayan peaks, flows the holy
river Gomati, with a gently cadenced pace, along the hills and dales.
The rays of the early morning sun are being sparklingly reflected by
those clear, white waters.

Rajatachalendra-sanu-vasine NAMAH SIVAYA!
Rajamana nitya manda-hasine NAMAH SIVAYA!
Rajakoraka-vatamsa-bhasine NAMAH SIVAYA!
Rajaraja-mitrata-prakaasine NAMAH SIVAYA!

The trees and plants all around, shining with their fruity, flowery
fertility, seem to bend their ‘heads’ in deep reverence for the SunGod.

(Obeisance to Lord Shiva He who is the denizen of the
silver mount Kailasa; He who ever smiles gently and radiantly; He
whose tresses are adorned with the crescent moon; He whose spiritual
radiance is further brightened by His friendship with Kubera the Lord
of the material Wealth!).

Indeed, all forms of living creatures appear to be praying at
the dawn of a fresh day to the supreme, manifest presence of the
unmanifest, Absolute that is the sun- the picture of pure of effulgence,
the fire of pure virtue, the witness of all worldly activity, the dispeller
of darkness- in these words (composed by the First Poet, Valmiki):
Taptachamikarabhaya vahnaye Visvakarmane,
Namah tamo bhinighnaya ruchaye loka-sakshine.

NAIMISA FOREST
Now, finishing the ablution in the sacred Gomati river, and
offering their daily prayers and oblations, the sages and seers are
returning to the hermitage in order to perform their sacrificial rites.
All over the hallowed ground the ear-delighting echoes of the
chanting of the Vedic hymns are being felt inspiringly. The fumes
emanating from the sacrificial fire-place are rising up into the skies
and are purifying the entire atmosphere in the surroundings.

The sages bowed to the great raconteur as he touched the
ground, and bade him welcome. Offering him a seat worthy of him,
they spoke to him thus: “O knower of the past, present and furture!
Your arrival is a source of supreme gratification to all of us. We are
quite aware of your duty of regaling us with the nobly moralising
and traditionally evocative stories, during the performance of our
sacrificial rites. Now, O sublime story-teller, please tell us the stories,
by hearing which, our hearts, minds and souls will be enriched and
ennobled, and after learning which, there is nothing left to be learnt”.
Pleased by their welcome and their request, sage suta said: “I
am honoured by your gracious words. I am gratefully conscious of
the elderly esteem you have bestowed on me, though I am your
junior in years. By joining you and taking part in your sacred Yajna,
I feel that my life is wholly Sanctified. The story of Lord Siva is the
most edifying one I can think of. Each and every one who hears this
story gains salvation”.

4

5

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

SAGE MARKANDEYA

(I pray to Vishnu- the quintessence of peacefulness; the Lord
whose bed is the divine serpent and who has the Lotus in the navel;
The King of gods, the Form of the universe, the sky-like Immanence;
the Cloud-hued, the Auspicious-limbed, the Lotus-eyed One; the
consort of goddess Lakshmi; the ultimate goal of Yogic communion;
the destroyer of earthly fear and the Monarch of all the worlds).

The first person who wanted to listen to the story of Lord Siva
was Markandeya. He went up to the Satya Loka (The World of
Truth). There he saw the Lord Creator, Brahma, being entertained
by his consort, Sarasvati Devi, on the Vina (lute). The sage then
prayed to that goddess of speech and learning:
Lalaamaanka-phaalaam lasadgaana-lolaam
Sva-bhaktaika-paalaam yasah-sri-kapolaam,
Kare tu aksha-maalaam kanat-pratna-lolaam
Bhaje Saaradaabaam ajasram madambaam.
(Ever do I pray to goddess Sarasvati, my divine Mother;
whose forehead is bedecked with the crimson sacred dot; who is
addicted to good music; who is dedicated to protecting her
devotees; whose cheeks dazzle with the brightness of her glory; and
whose hands are adorned with the constantly revolving golden rosary).
Reciting this sloka (composed by Adi Sankara), he besought
the goddess to enlighten him on the story of Lord Siva.
Upon which, the goddess said: “Learned sage, your request
is proper, no doubt, but it is not within my power to depict the
mighty doings of Lord Siva. You have to go to Vaikuntha and
approach Lord Vishnu for that noble purpose”.
Accordingly, Markandeya reached Vaikuntha, and worshipped
Lord Vishnu thus:
Saantaakaaram bhujaga-sayanam padmanaabham
suresam
Visvaakaaram gagana-sadrisam megha-varnam subhaangam,
Lakshmee-kaantam kamala-nayanam, yogi-hrid-dhyaanagamyam
Vande Vishnum bhava-bhaya-haram sarva-lokaikanaatham||

Requested to be informed about Lord Siva, Lord Vishnu
smilingly answered; “Good sage, you seem to be rather innocuous.
Only Lord Siva can inform anyone fully about Him-self. Please go
to the silver mount Kailaasa to get your honest wish fulfilled”.

MOUNT KAILAS
Approaching the silver mountain, Markandeya feasted his eyes
on its resplendent beauty and felt the sweet perfumes which the
flower-and-fruit-filled trees on it were spreading about. There he
saw the blessed Lord, seated on a moonstone altar, and enjoying
the company of his consort, parvati.
Enraptured by the divine presence, the sage sought the Lord’s
grace and refuge thus:
Dugdhaih madhva-aajya-yuktaih dadhi-guda-sahitaih
snaapitam na eva lingam
No liptam chandana-aadyaih kanaka-virachitaih poojitam na
prasunaih|
Dhupaih karpura-deepaih vividha-rasa-yutaih na eva bakshyaupahaaraih
Kshantavyah me aparaadhah Siva! Siva! Bhoh, Sree Mahaadeva! Sambho!||
(O Lord Siva, forgive me for my remissness in not praying to you
by anointing your symbolic Linga with the five kinds of nectar; by
smearing it with sandalwood paste; by worshipping it with golden
flowers; by offering it the incense of comphor; or by consecrating it
with various tasteful oblations!).

6

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Both Lord Siva and goddess Parvati were pleased with the
sincere contrition of the sage, and asked him to let his wish be known
to them. Then the sage said he wanted to hear the story of Siva
from the Lord himself. The divine couple reacted with a smile as
though they found the request just enough, but thought that it would
not be proper for the Lord to narrate His own tale. Consequently,
they suggested that Nandisvara was the right person to oblige the
sage. Hearing the suggestion, the divine Bull, Nandi, shed tears of
joyful gratification. He realised that by giving him this opportunity,
the Lord was expressing His implicit faith in His mount.

SAGE NARADA

NANDISVARA
Markandeya, receiving the blessings of the divine couple,
proceeded towards the Nandi: “Dear Nandi, for long years you
have been the trusted mount and servant of the blessed first couple,
Siva and Parvati. You know all about them, and now they have
given you the permission to narrate their history to me. I am all
attention to hear you”.
So saying, Markandeya was mentally recollecting the story of
that sacred Bull. This Nandi is the God-given son of the great
anchorite Silada who found him while digging the hole for the
sacrificial fire place. It is the same Nandi who, though granted only
a short life by Lord Siva, prayed to that Lord’s image at Kedara
with supreme penitence and obtained His boon for a long life.
Besides granting him the status of being their mount, the divine couple
also saw to it that he should be worshipped along with themselves.
And this great Nandi always keeps a watchful eye on his Master
and his Mistress, whereever they are.
The Nandi said: “Dear sage, to the best of my ability I shall
narrate that sacred history, which was not quite assimilated even by
the great sage Narada, about whom I shall tell you something at the
outset.

7

Once sage Narada was performing a penance on the banks of
Lake Manasasarovar, with the aim of obtaining Lord Siva’s grace.
Mistaking his aim, and fearing that the sage might have his eye on
his throne, Indra, the Lord of godly hosts, sent the celestial courtesans
like Rambha etc, to disturb Narada’s penance. But neither their
dance nor their music was of any avail in enticing the sage, and they
returned to paradise to report their failure to Indra.
Worried, Indra went down to Narada by himself. The sage
was worshipping Lord Siva with great concentration. Seeing for
himself that the sage’s purpose was the attainment of Siva’s blessings
only, Indra returned to his heavenly home, with his peace of mind
restored.
Narada clairvoyantly understood all that transpired: the way
he was able to withstand the wiles of the heavenly damsels,
convinced him that it was all due to his own individual self-control.
But he could not appreciate the fact that it was Siva’s grace that
saved him.
Narada then vainly told himself; “Even Lord Siva’s penance
was once successfully disturbed by Cupid, but not mine”.
Glorying in such vain thoughts, Narada went up to Satya Loka
to broadcast his power resisting the temptation to which he was
subjected by Rambha and other damsels. The sage’s parents,
Brahma and Sarasvati, were aware of his folly when he boasted to
them about his self-restraint, but they also knew that their own cousel
would be disregarded by their vainglorious offspring. so they kept
mum, in their knowledge that eventually Vishnu and Siva would
teach him a lesson in humility.
But the sage misinterpreted the silence of the Lord Creator
and goddess Sarasvati, as their tacit appreciation of his ‘feat’ and
prided himself on achieving this first recognition of his fame.

8

9

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

As Lord Siva and goddess Paarvati also kept quiet, when
he repeated his boasts at mount Kailasa, Narada was further
assured of his freshness and thought that it was his second
‘Victory’.

King silanidhi, seeing Narada, went forward to greet him, and
received him with due honours. Seating the sage on a gem-studded
throne, the king sent for his daughter Srimati.

Mentally worshipping Lord Vishnu, Narada informed the latter
that his penance was gloriously rewarded, in that he could easily
withstand the amorous advances of the celestial courtesans. He went
on to procalim that no longer the ‘Maya’ of Vishnu and Siva would
have any effect on him.
Then Lord Vishnu reprimanded him: “Narada, know ‘Maya’
to be nothing but the source of all creation, the power of nature. It
is dependent or Myself and Lord Siva for its efficacy. Beware of its
uncanny ability to open the eyes of the vain people. You are in the
habit of roaming about the three worlds (heaven, earth and the space
in between). You will soon understand for yourself how the power
of ‘Maya’ works its ways inscrutably”.
Goddess Lakshmi smiled understandingly. However, Narada
could not grasp the force of Vishnu’s words. He thought that the
Lord was merely speaking in jest. Accordingly, still feeling selfimportant, he first went down to pay a visit to the Earth.

KALYANA DURGA
The capital of the mightly kingdom of king silanidhi presented
a splendid sight, with its sky-kissing palaces and temples made of
alabaster and marble. Nature was at its best and brightest. Men
and women there were the most beautiful of the human species,
and were looking like angels and archangels of the celestial realms.
It is difficult to describe in mere words the splendour of the
city of Kalyana Durga, which attracts even the hermits who renounce
the world. Everywhere the thresholds are bedecked with multicoloured festoons; all the streets are sprinkled with perfumed waters.
Sage Narada could not make out the reason for this special
decoration of an already lovely city.

On entering the court the princess bowed to the feet of the
sage and was introduced to him by her father, with these words:
“This is my daughter Srimati. She has now come of age. Tomorrow
I am arranging a ‘Svayam-vara’ (wherein the suitors are assembled
in the court, from among whom the girl chooses the one she likes
best for her lifemate) for her. You are a great seer who knows
past, present and future. Kindly read her palm and tell me what
destiny has in store for her. I also request you to attend the
‘Svayam-vara’ function tomorrow and see to it that the wedding
is celebrated in proper great style.”
Narada’s mind was unaccountably perturbed. He appeared
to be unable to withstand the onslaught of Cupid’s arrows, which
were imperceptibly emanating from the wonderful good looks of
Srimati. He decided upon marrying her. Telling the king that his
daughter was the equal of goddess Lakshmi and would get a husband
equal to Vishnu, he went back to Vaikuntha and prayed Lord Vishnu
thus:
Sriyaa saata-kumbha-dyuti-snigdha-kaantyaa
Dharanyaa cha durvaa-dala-syaamalaangyaa
Kalatra-dvayena amunaa toshitaaya
Trilokee-grihasthaaya Vishno namaste! (Aadi Sankara)
(I bow to you, Lord Vishnu, who are indeed the ‘house-holder
of the three worlds; but contented with the two consorts the goldenhued goddess Lakshmi and the Durva-leaf-coloured, dusky
Bhudevi).
Although Lord Vishnu realised the real purpose of Narada’s
visit, he greeted the sage formally as though he knew nothing about
the state of his mind.
Since there was no time to lose, the sage came directly to the
print and requested the Lord to grant him his form for the duration

10

11

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

of the ‘Svayam-vara’. Vishnu acceded to his request, and Narada
returned to Kalyana Durga, and took his seat in the royal court,
thinking that he was in the guise of Lord Vishnu.

all, did He not forgive the follies of many a devotee of his? Indeed,
it was my fault to depend on such a god. Henceforth I shall try to
forget this Vishnu...

Srimati entered the court. Her maids handed the garland to
her. The king addressed the gathering: “Esteemed kings, my
daughter is going to choose her husband by garlanding one of
you. Kindly conduct yourselves with decorum and dignity, and
make this function a great success”.

Looking at this grieving sage, the bride’s maids laughed in
derision. Turning round, he asked them what became of their friend,
the princess. Telling him that she was taken away to Vaikuntha by
Lord Vishnu, they brought a mirror and asked him to look at his
image.

With due grace and bashfulness, Srimati began slowly walking
round the assembly of princes, unoffensively observing their mien.

To his amazement he saw the face of a monkey attached to the
trunk of Vishnu. Forgetting himself in his sore disappointment, he
rushed up to Vaikuntha, with an idea of cursing Vishnu.

Accompanied by her maids, Srimati came near Narada: finding
him repulsive, she proceeded on her quest. Narada could not
understand the reason behind her indifference. Actually, Lord Vishnu
was also in the assembly, in the form of a prince. Srimati was a great
devotee bent upon making Lord Vishnu her sole lifemate. By virtue of
her true devotion she could detect the Lord Vishnu who was disguised
as a prince. Without wasting another moment, she instantaneously
garlanded Lord Vishnu who was in the prince’s guise. Silanidhi was
delighted with her choice, and felt that his life was at last sanctified
perfectly. Lord Vishnu, for his part, took away Srimati along with
him, and disappeared from the court. While the courtiers applauded
the choice of the princess, the disappointed princes left the assembly
hall with their heads bent in shame.
Narada was crestfallen. He began to cogitate: “who was that
stranger? Could it be Vishnu Himself ? If so, how could He make
His own boon ineffective? What harm have I done Him that He
should shame me thus? If He has the right to enjoy the company of
three wives, why should I be content with leading the life of a celibate?
Should He thus deceive those who worship Him? True, I did boast
about my self-restraint, which I thought was so inviolable as to
withstand the ‘tricks’ of even Vishnu and Shiva; but should He not
have overlooked my prattle as it became an elder like Him? After

The maids wondered among themselves why a sage should
thus be struck with wild passion and wilder wish for revenge, and
went their way.
When the angry sage came up to him, Vishnu kept quiet.
But goddess Lakshmi was somewhat worried.
Narada spoke out: “Lord, under the impression that you were
a truthful deity I sought your assistance. But you behaved like a
cad. Don’t run away with the idea that your foul play will be left
unpunished. Do you think that you have done the right thing in
abducting the princess whom I loved so much? Was it just on your
part to provide me with a monkey’s visage and make me the laughingstock of the entire royal court?
“For the dishonour you have subjected me to, I am cursing
you that come to grief on account of a woman and that you then
be helped out of your distress by the very monkey race when
you bemoan your loss of your lifemate in your human incarnation”.
Despite this imprecation, Lord Vishnu did not lose his
equilibrium, but simply kept smilling.
Seeing the quiet dignity of the Lord, Narada was contrite. He
realised his folly. Immediately he began begging Vishnu’s pardon: “O

12

13

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Lord, how can I ever be absolved of the sin of cursing you? Cut my
body into pieces with your Sudarsana disc (wheel-weapon). That is
the right punishment for my crime of abusing and imprecating you”.
So saying he began to sob inconsolably.

Convinced that the sage was genuinely repentant, Lord Siva
forgave him his sins. Verily Siva and Vishnu alone are so
magnanimous as to pardon even the people who offend them.

Then the blessed Lord consoled him: “My dear Narada, forget
the past. All that happened was the will of God Almighty whose
actions are indeed inscrutable. Now you can save yourself by seeking
Lord Siva’s refuge, who is the Lord of all creation. Although as
‘Rudra’ He destroys the wicked, He it is that is responsible for the
re-creation of the universe at the time of Pralaya (final cataclysm),
in His form of ‘Sadaa Siva’ the eternal Lord of compassion, mercy
and grace.
“Even the Lord Creator, Brahma, and his consort, and myself
and goddess Lakshmi, ever pray to Him. I need not tell you that I
too along with Brahma and Indra, sometimes court trouble, deluded
by the mysterious ‘Maya’ of Lord Siva. None can trespass his
dictates. “O be careful and attentive. Always remain in the habit of
hearing the soulful stories of Siva and in visiting His temples and
praying to Him in your mind”.
Accordingly, Narada began visiting the pilgrim-centres
consecrated to Lord Siva. At Varanasi he anointed His image (in the
form of Visvesvara) with the sacred Ganga waters, worshipped His
consort, Annapurna Devi and offered prayers to Kala-bhairava. At
Sri Sailam he prayed to the divine couple’s incarnations as Lord
Mallikarjuna and goddess Bhramaramba; and at Kalahasti, as Lord
Kalahastisvara and Jnana prasunambika. He worshipped the Lord’s
other incarnations as Nataraja Svami at Chidambaram; and as
Brihadisvara at Tanjavur. Again he paid his worshipful tribute to, and
sought the forgiveness of, the godly couple in the form of Sundaresvara
and Minakshi at Madhura and of Ramalingesvara and Parvata
Vardhani at Ramesvaram.
At each and every temple he offered his prayers, he vowed
that he would never again be guilty of the sort of sacrilege he
committed against Lord Vishnu.

SIVA TATTVA RAHASYAMU
(THE SIGNIFICANCE OF LORD
SIVA’S GLORY)
Returning to the celestial region, Narada went up to his
father, the Lord Creator, Brahma, and requested him to enlighten
him on the Siva mystique, in these words: “Lord, they say that Lord
Siva alone is the perfectly whole Incarnation of the Absolute and
that you, Vishnu and Rudra (the Trinity of Hindu Gods, of whom
the last-mentioned is the phenomenal aspect of the same noumenal
Siva) are merely fragmentary aspects of that Supreme Being. Kindly
sing to me the praises of that Lord of Mercy and Beatitude!”.
“Narada, I am glad you want to learn about the essence of
Siva’s spiritual grace. Indeed, by the mere hearing of that mystic
grace, the hearer’s sins will be washed away; his ignorance will be
dispelled; and his self-deception will be replaced by selfemancipation.
“Verily, the nature of ‘Siva-tattva’ cannot be depicted either by
words or symbols, because It transcends both name and form. The
Yogis, who have realised the communion with the Universal Self,
discover that essence in their inner selves.
“The spirit of Siva neither grows nor decreases; has neither
beginning nor end. It is eternally existent, eternally conscious and
eternally blissful. It is one without a second. It has no attributes or
qualities of race, nature and action. It can only be known through
Itself and by Itself...”
Then Brahma proceeded to narrate how this attributeless
Absolute has begun to assume a form, and how It acquired attributes
through Its manifestin, and yet in Itself remained without attributes
and qualities.

14

15

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Goaded by the creative principle of Its own ‘Maya’, It began
to conceive the idea of Creation in accordance with the nature of
the creational field, which is divided into three essential characteristics,
Sattva (the noble), Rajas (the passionate) and Tamas (the dull). At
first It assumed the form of the Cosmic Person, who has all the
characteristics of manifest perfection. The Transcendent pure
Consciousness has now become the Immanent Creative Force.

Their dwelling-place is called ‘Siva-nagara’, because it is the
abode of the Siva couple; ‘Avimukta’, because it knows no
extinction; and ‘Aananda vana’, because it is the resort of the two
embodiments of blissful Aananda. There they lived for a long while,
performing penance and observing Yogic practices.

It has created out of Itself the creative power of Sakti, which
follows It like Its own shadow for ever, It is also known as ‘Prakriti’
(Inherent Nature) and ‘Maya’ (changing Reality), as opposed to
the changeless Ultimate Reality.
Know this ‘Sakti’ or ‘Prakriti’ as the mother of all intellect.
Indeed, this Sakti is not only the source of all creation but is the
mother of the Trinity (Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesvara or the
personalised form of Siva).
Now hear from me all about the attributes of that primal
goddess, Sakti or Mahesvari.
Her hands are adorned with conch-shell, disc, mace, bow and
arrow; all those eight hands of hers assume a gesture, which assures
absolute protection to the devotee, and exude a scintillatingly lovable
effulgence. Her two eyes, which are as delightful as a fullbloomed
lotus, shine like twin stars. Her whole golden being is debecked
with the nine kinds of precious stones and sparkles as brightly as a
thousand suns.

At one point during their conjugal blessedness, they
thought of creating a mighty, magnificent and scholarly son who
would take care of the process of creation and would enable
them, thereby, to be ever immersed in their Yogic commuion.
Such an heir of their’s would look after the cycle of creation,
preservation and extinction, and would relieve them of their mundane
preoccupations.

BIRTH OF VISHNU
As Lord Siva looked on His consort, Sakti, with nectar-raining
glances from His graceful eyes, there materialised before them a
boy with a resplendent body of sapphire-blue hue, radiant eyes,
four strong arms, a diamond called Kaustubha on his chest and a
bliss-awakening general mien.
The divine child returned the gratified smile of the first couple
with this prayer on his lips:
Bhukti-mukti-divya-bhoga-daayine Namah Sivaaya
Sakti-Kalpita-prapancha-bhaagine Namah Sivaaya|
Bhakta-sankata-apahaara-yogine Namah Sivaaya
Yukta-sanmanah-saroja-yogine Namah Sivaaya||

As that single prime source of creation evolved into a myraid
creatures, even while She remained single in Her own entity, Her
Lord, Shiva, with the crescent moon in His matted locks; with His
three eyes, five faces and ten hands; with the river Ganga embedded
in his braid; and with the trident in His hand glistened with His
supreme hue, as pure-white as camphor.

(I salute Lord Siva who endows material sustenance, salvation
and supreme splendour; who creates the entire universe by means
of his Sakti-associate; who removes the dangers of his devotees;
and who ever dwells in the heart-lotus of his Yogic worshippers).

This divine pair Shiva and Shakti are ever united and thus have
been living together.

Upon which, Lord Siva blessed him thus: “Since you pervade
the whole universe with your supreme spirit, you will be known as

16

17

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Vishnu (Visvam vyaapnoti it Vishnuh); since you have eyes which
resemble full-blown lotuses, you will be called ‘Kamalaksha’; as
you are the destroyer of the demoniac forces, you will have the
appellation, ‘Daitya-ari’; in as much as your garments are made of
burnished gold, you will have the designation, ‘Kaanchanaambara’;
since you never cease to be, you will be hailed as ‘Achyuta’; your
lovely locks give you the sobriquet, Kesi; attracting the hearts of all
creatures, you gain the title ‘Hari’ (harati manaamsi iti); being the
noblest of men, you are ‘Purushottama; as the spouse of the goddess
of Wealth, Laksmi (Sree), you are ‘Sreedhara’ in your incarnation
as the dark One, you are ‘Krishna’; by virtue of possesing four
arms, you are ‘Caturbaahu’; upholding the universe (Visva), you
become ‘Visvambhara’; now you live up to all these just titles of
yours!”

came the five cognitive sense-organs and the three modes Sattva,
Rajas and Tamas.

Then breathing out the scriptural treasures within Him and
infusing them into Vishnu’s mind, Lord Siva disappeared along with
His consort. Having expressed his gratitude to Lord Siva, Vishnu
performed a penance dedicated to the former, for long years.
Exhausted with his hard austerities, Vishnu found streams of water
pouring down from his body. In those waters he rested himself on a
banyan leaf called ‘Brahma’, for several ages. Thereby he came to
be known as ‘Naaraayana’ (naaraah aapah ayanam sthaanam yasya
sah he whose abode is water).
At the behest of Lord Siva, a lotus sprouted up from Vishnu’s
navel. The stalks of that lotus knew neither beginning nor end... At
that point an aerial voice was heard: “In the Yogic trance of yours
will dawn the light of Knowledge”.
As Vishnu grasped the import of those words, from that
primordial ethereal Sound evolved the four Vedas and the twentyfour ‘tattvas’. From ‘Prakriti’ arose ‘Mahat’; from ‘Mahat’ the
‘Ahankaara’ (ego-sense), which evoked the five ‘Tanmaatras’ (the
unmanifest five elements) which in turn gave birth to their explicit
five elements (earth, water, light, air and space). From the elements

Looking on this process of evolution Vishnu was wonderstruck. Even while he was thus wondering inwardly, from the sweetsmelling lotus-navel of his arose the five-faced Brahma, whose
essential nature was that of Tamas (the mode of ignorance that is at
the root of mundane creation), and whose body was of the colour
of a red lily.
Then the newly created Brahma began to think; “Who are
my parents? Where is my birthplace? Why don’t - see anyone
whom I can call my flesh and blood?”. Finding no answer to his
queries, Brahma remained disconsolate. Then Lord Siva appeared
before him and suggested that he might chant the transcendentally
symbolic mantra, AUM, in order to find both peace of mind and
the answers to his questions. As he did so, Lord Vishnu presented
Himself before Brahma. Brahma could not make out who He was.
Blinded by his original mode of passion (tamas), he was covered
by the darkness of ignorance.

DISCUSSION
The foolish Brahma asked Vishnu: “Who are you?” Unmindful
of the insult implied in this query, Vishnu enlightened Brahma on the
source of his birth, and added that he was prepared to teach him
the scriptures and offer him any boons he sought.
Brahma there upon derided Vishnu: “Who do you think you
are that you say that you are the cause of my birth? I don’t believe
you. In fact, I myself am the master of all this manifest nature and
the creator of the universe. If you think dare not do so, seek my
refuge and beg my pardon”.
Still Vishnu was patient with this ‘upstart’. Mistaking
Vishnu’s equanimity for His weakness, Brahma challenged Him
again and fought with Him for a long while.

18

19

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Seeking the undesirability of this duel, and realising its
futility, Lord Siva, as the cosmic symbol of His supracosmic
entity (which knows no beginning, middle or end) erected
Himself as a ‘Linga’ (the form of creative, pervasive principle
suggestively expressed through the generative symbol)
between the two fighting gods.

creator of the manifest world. You, Vishnu, you are responsible
for the protection and preservation of the created world. I am
to take care of the eventual destruction and re-creation of the
world. Actually, there is no substantial difference among us
except in the matter of our apparent functions. We are three of
us the trinity of godly essence. This Linga of mine is the mundane
sign of the triple-faceted AUM. It is also the symbol of my
creative Truth behind the universal Energy”.

There upon Brahma tried to discover the ‘head’ of the Linga,
while Vishnu attempted to find His ‘foot’. Brahma assumed the
form of a powerful swan and flew up to the sky; still he could not
succed in his search; nor could Vishnu, by going down to the nether
world. After a while, they appreciated the fact that it was all the
divine mystery of Lord Siva; mutually reconciled, they began
praying to Him and begged Him to reveal Himself before them.
Consequently, the five-headed Lord Siva, arrived on the scene,
in his fully resplendent glory, which evoked the holy sound of AUM
on all sides of earth and heaven. He addressed Brahma: “Verily,
you were born of the lotus-navel of Vishnu, though you yourself
were not aware of the fact. It was this ignorance of yours that made
you hit that deity on the chest and pick a quarrel with Him. Now
repent and learn from Him all that He so benevolently promised to
teach you”.

So saying, the Lord entered back into his earthly Linga
Brahma duly begged the pardon of Vishnu, and promised to
the latter that he would never again be guilty of such things as Vishnu
for His part taught him the secrets of creation.
In the end both Brahma and Vishnu also realised the essential
unity of the Trinity (Brahma, Vishnu and Maheswara gods).

WORSHIP OF THE LINGA
Returning to his primordial form, Lord Siva told Vishnu: “This
Linga is my worldly representative. Your desires will be fulfilled and
your troubles will cease. Similarly, impress on your devotees the
need to worship the Linga, in order that they too might be benefited
like you”.

Still blinded by the mode of Tamas, and unconvinced by the
advice of Lord Siva, Brahma asked Him: “Who are you? who
granted you these five heads of yours? I alone am qualified to possess
the five heads. Do you understand?”.

Brahma and Vishnu expressed their gratitude to Siva, and
requested the great God to come to their rescue when they are
confronted with any difficulty, They also begged Him to create
Himself in a material form, so as to aid them in their worldly functions.

Angered, Lord Siva converted his left little finger-nail into a
sword and cut off Brahma’s fifth head. Having learnt his lesson, the
now-four-headed Brahma fell prostrate at the feet of Lord Siva
and sought His forgiveness.

Then the Lord said: “Verily I myself am the creator, preserver
and destroyer of this universe. Even in the multiplicity of my
manifestations I remain alone in my essence just as, the gold retains
its primal essence even in its various forms of ornamental manufacture.

Then Lord Siva spoke to Brahma and Vishnu: “Know that
you both were created by me. You, Brahma, you are to be the

“Brahma, I shall evolve from your forehead, by the name of
Rudra, in order to punish the wicked and protect the virtuous. There

20

21

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

is no metaphysical difference between the pure consciousness of
my original nature and the explicit image of Rudra. You will be the
adjunct to my creative power of the manifest Maya. So would
you, Vishnu. As Rudra, in whom is mirrored my full incarnation, I
will not be bound by the dictates of physical nature. And since there
is no essential distinction between my manifest form and my essential
self, every one can reap equal benefit by praying to Rudra or to my
transcendent reality of Mahesvara entity.

he or she will be consigned to eternal damnation. In fact, if anyone
conceives the trinity of us as mutually contradictory, he or she will
perish”.

“Brahma, you will be the creator, who evokes the mode of
passion (Rajas), and a part of my Sakti aspect will be your consort,
Sarasvati. Vishnu, you will represent the mode of nobility (Sattva),
and a fragment of my Sakti will be your beloved, Lakshmi. And in
my own Rudra form, which symbolises the mode of dullness
(Tamas), as reflected in the lower nature of creation (creation) is
based on the mixture of the three modes, and God is not directly
responsible for it: it creates itself according to the nature of its own
modal functioning receiving the pervasive, universal energy of God
of Siva), a part of my Sakti will serve me lovingly by the name of
Kali.

THE NON-DUALITY OF SIVA & VISHNU
Lord Siva continued: “Vishnu, along with Brahma and every
sincere devotee, you must worship me essentially non-different from
you (‘ananya bhakti’ means not just “not thinking of, or nor praying
to, some other, god”. but to worship God as spiritually non-different
from the worshipper).
“Hereafter I shall appear before the world as Rudra. You are
henceforth free to rule the world by incarnating yourself in the form
suited to the particular time and place. Whenever you feel that your
strength is not adequant to punish the wicked and protect the
righteous, I shall come to your aid.
“We are really one in spirit. If ever any one tries to separate
us, or treats one of us as being superior or antagonistic to the other,

EVOLUTION OF CREATION
Then when Lord Siva was prayed, to by Brahma, to bring
about the manifestation of His creative power, and egg-like object
sprung up and floated over the cosmic waters. Brahma was amazed
at its sight, and spoke to Vishnu thus: “Lord, enter this inanimate
egg and instil life into it”.
Accordingly, Lord Vishnu entered it with a myriad eyes and
heads (the ‘sahasra’ literally, “thousand” in the Purusha Suktam
actually means ‘countless’; so the question eyes?” does not arise at
all). Next from the egg evolved the expressive sound of AUM.
Brahma then entered the egg through the aperture made by the
AUM-evolution. Happily discovering there in the all-pervasive
form of Vishnu, Brahma discarded his assumed mode of dullness,
and came out of the egg, regaining his four-headed divine form.
From the forehead of this Lord of Creation (Brahma), first
came the manifest aspect of AUM; then followed the three worlds
earth, space and heaven (Bhuh, Bhuvah, Suvah);the Lord of light,
the sun-god; and from the sun, the worlds of Penance (Tapah) and
Truth (Satyam).
From out of his four faces he created the four Vedas. Following
the Rigveda, he began initiating the programme of Creation. The
hot rays of the sun caused the waters to evaporate.
Brahma divided into two the egg that came out of the
waters.The upper half of the egg became the sky, and the lower
one, the earth. Immensely delighted at the sight, Brahma started
creating the plant and animal life, along with the Homo sapiens and
the great sages like Sanaka and Sanandana. The sages, however,
did not co-operative with their parent but went to their hermitages
to perform penance.

22

23

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

THE BIRTH OF RUDRA

which included the power to accept the oblations from the sages
and others. The people of the godly race were made the denizens
of paradise (or heaven).

Brahma was much dejected. Even when he prayed to Lord
Siva, he was not granted that God’s grace. He began shedding
tears of desolation. The tear-drops that fell on the ground turned
into supreme sprouts of poison. As the impassioned Brahma’s
eyebrows began to agitate with an uncanny splendour, Rudra
appeared on the scene of Creation. Rudra created his own retinue,
known as ‘Rudra Gana’, and promised to help Brahma.
Then the Trinity divided among themselves the abodes of
heaven: the world of Truth (Satya) for Brahma; that of Vaikuntha
for Vishnu; and that the of Silver Mount for Rudra. To fulfil their
respective duties, each god went back to his apportioned world.

CREATION OF THE DEMI-GODS AND OTHERS
Brahma renewed his creational process. From his eyes he
created Marichi; from his heart, Bhrigu; from his ears, Atri; from his
head, Angirasa; from his arms, Kardama; from his vital breath,
Daksha; from his ‘samaana’ air Vasishtha; from his ‘sankalpa’
(volition), the sages Dharma, Udana, Pulastya; from his mind, Ruchi;
and from his thighs, Andhama.
All these personages were aiding the Creator in his work.
From his own essence, Brahma brought forth the first Emperor,
Svayambhuva Manu, and the maidens, Padmagandhi and Satarupa.
Daksha begot sixty-four daughters by Prasuti. Of them ten
were given in marriage to sage Kasyapa. mong them, the one named
Diti gave birth to the demon race; Aditi was delivered of the godly
race; Vinata was the mother of the divine bird Garuda (the mount of
Vishnu); and Kadruva had variegated progency.
The Lord of the divine hosts (the godly race) was named Indra.
Lord Siva gave Indra the right to rule the kingdom of paradise,

Since the demoniac race was evil-minded, its members were
denied the right to accept any worship, and they were made to live
in jungles and caves.
Padmagandhi and Satarupi were married to Svayambhuva
Manu. Their offsprings were three boys Priyavrata, Agni and
Uttanapada and three girls, Rakuti, Devahuti and Prasuti. Ruchi
married Rakuti; Kardama, Devahuti; and Daksha, Prasuti (as noted
earlier). Of the other fifty-four daughters of Daksha and Prasuti,
thirteen married Dharma, and eleven were wedded to Bhrigu. One
of them, Sati, became the wife of Siva. The other girls were married
to Marichi, Angirasa, Pulastya, Atri, Vasishtha and other sages.

THE WHEEL OF TIME
The Trinity of gods then created the Sun and the Moon, with
the intention of dividing time into day and night. The sun was to
provide the light and heat for the earth’s fertility. The moon was to
promote the herbal growth.
The four sides and the four corners of the universe were then
formed, each of which had a presiding deity. Then the day, week,
month and year were reckoned, with the six seasons that make up
one year. The planetary system was also devised.
For the uplift of mankind, the sacrificial rites were prescribed.
These sacrifices are to be performed during the northern solstice
(Uttaraayana).

BIRTH OF KUBERA
The city of Kampilya is a storehouse of all the riches. In that
town dwelt the Brahmin, named Agnidatta. He is well-versed in
the Vedic lore, an erudite preacher of philosophy; a performer of

24

25

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

sacrificial rites; and an ideal householder. He and his wife had a
son, by name Gunahina, who was brought up with too much
indulgence. When the boy was hardly eight years old, his
Upanayanam (thread ceremony) was performed with due
splendour. He was then sent to school for his higher education.
Whenever he left for school, His mother gave him several sweets
and pampered him with similar gifts. The boy used to lie to his
parents about his going to school, for, actually, he was playing
truant and associating himself with evil characters.

he will severely punish both of us. Don’t you know that learning
makes a man famous as well as rich? Haven’t you heard the great
sayings which maintain that even all the riches of the world are
useless if one does not have education, that he who has no education
is verily a beast, that the only constant ornament is the good speech
that comes of eduction, and that education is the unending latent
wealth? Your forefathers had all been great scholars who performed
mighty sacrificial rites. Your father himself is a noble example to all
Brahmin householders. Aren’t you ashamed of yourself to be such
a good-for-nothing, being the heir to such glorious ancestors You
are already past eighteen years of age. Your wife, Akalmasha, is
sixteen. All your in-laws are well-placed in life. I am devoted to my
husband and my family. Taking into consideration all these facts,
must you not behave yourself?”.

Even when he grew up and became a youth, he did not
relinquish his bad habits and bad company. He squandered all his
wealth in gambling, and pawned his ornaments. He never observed
the austere practices befitting his birth.
Although his character was questionable, he was a man of a
very presentable appearance. Besides, knowing him to be the son of
a great sage-like householder, a worthy Brahmin offered his
daughter’s hand in marriage to him. The wedding was celebrated
with great pomp and pageantry.
But marriage brought no change in the conduct of Gunahina.
Strangely enough, his father, preoccupied with his discourses in the
city and the household austerities, could not detect the misconduct
of his son. If ever he asked his wife why he could not find the son at
home at any time, she would reply that the boy had gone to the
temple, after finishing his scriptural studies, in the company of his
fellow-students. His query about the boy’s observing his sacred
daily practices would find similar evasive answers from the overindulgent mother of the misguided boy. Even though she was thus
prevaricating, she was inwardly sorry about the misbehaviour of
Gunahina.
One day while serving him his food, the mother spoke to
Gunahina thus: “Dear boy, till now I have kept from your father the
news of your evil ways. If he comes to know about your conduct

But since Gunahina was too far gone in his wild habits like
gambling and drinking, hunting and stealing, this motherly
supplication fell on deaf ears. Slowly he had been gambling away
his possessions and pawning the household goods, one by one.
One day he stole his father’s golden ring and lost it in a bet.
Agnidatta was astounded to find it on the finger of a gambler; he
wanted the man to tell him how he got it and threatened to report
the matter to the king if the gambler failed to reveal the truth. Then
the gambler confessed that he got it from Gunahina, by way of
gambling debt apart from several other valuables on former occasions.
Agnidatta was crestfallen. Bemoaning the blot on the family
escutcheon, because of the misconduct of his son, he returned
home. Attending to the duties of a host and a pious householder,
and complating his meal in the company of saintly guests, he
spoke to his wife in solitude: “By pampering our son too much,
you spoiled him. You have always been lying to me about his
way of life. I will have nothing to do with you. Go your way!”.
The lady could only respond in miserable silence.

26

27

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

At last, Gunahina, unable to change his ways, left his home
and went away somewhere.

Seeking that he was truly contrite, the pilgrims said: “Friend,
tomorrow is the holy day of Mahaa Sivaratri. By fasting all day,
anointing the Linga at the auspicious hour of its ‘cosmic
manifestation’ (Linga-udbhava), taking a dip in the holy river
Goutami, and accepting the sacred oblation, you will be purged of
your sins”.

The parents were restless in their anxiety and misery.
Gunahina was roaming about in wild forests. He had nothing
to eat nor even fresh water to drink. He began to fear that his end
was fast approaching. Too weak to move further, he squatted on
the ground. Then his wandering eyes happened to espy a lake in the
vicinity. He jumped with joy and crawled up to the lake to drink the
water to his heart’s content.
Resting himself under a tree, he began to ponder over the past
events that brought him to this state. Then he had a delirium in which
he saw his mother crying over his lot. He lamented thus: “Mother
not at least educate myself for, even though my money is gone, I
could have still some-how managed to survive, if only I had that
education which no thief can steal and which hidden wealth. Mother,
how can I ever make amends to you?”. So saying, he tried to fall at
her feet to beseech her forgiveness. But feeling no tangible entity
before him, he realised it was all dream. Seeing how helpless he
was, he began to wail loudly.
After a while, he saw a group of devotees going to the shrine
of Somesvara, singing the hymns in praise of Lord Siva. Approaching
them, he said: “Great souls, I am a miserable wretch, who paid no
heed to the good counsels of my parents. Now I am repentant and
penitent. If you will kindly allow me to follow you, I shall be eternally
grateful to you. Please rest here for a while, and I will join you after
bathing in this tank”. The kindly pilgrims acceded to his humble
request.
Gunahina remembered the hymns he learnt before he fell into
bad company, and praying to Lord Siva, the sacred rivers and the
sun-god, he completed his ablution.

Mentally worshipping Lord Vighnesvara, the god who wards
off the obstacles in the way of his devotees, Gunahina joined the
pilgrims on their trek to the temple of Somesvara.
The next morning the pilgrims reached the banks of the river
Godavari. The mighty river appeared to be swelling with rapture at
the sight of so many pilgrims on its banks.
Gunahina, along with the rest of the devotees, bathed in the
sacred river, after reciting the slokas in the river’s praise.
They similarly worshipped the sun-god while having their holy
bath.
Finally offering the following repentant prayer to Lord Siva,
Gunahina entered the holy shrine:
Praudho ham yauvanasthah vishaya-visha-dharaih
panchabhih marma-sandhau dashtah hashtah vivekah,
Suta-dhana-yuvati-svaada-saukhye nishannah
maana-garva-adhirudhah kshantavyah me
Aparaadhah, Siva, Siva, Siva bhoh Sree Mahaadeva
Sambho!
(O Lord Siva, please forgive me for the misdeed of not
worshipping you in my youth, when I was bitten by the serpent of
the five senses, and when my vain, proud mind was thoughtlessly
preoccupied with the attachment to my family and my worldly
wealth!)
All around, the devotional spirit was evocative, as the hymns
to Lord Siva were being chanted; the bells before the sanctum

28

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

sanctorum were being rung; the bilva leaves were being used to
worship the Lingas; the aborigine-instrels (maaladaasarulu) were
displaying their dance-drama, describing the glory of the twelve
illumined Lingas; the Chencha tribals, bedecked with peacockfeathers in their headdress, and ringing the bell in the hand were
singing saivite songs; and the huge multitude of devotees was
watching with rapt attention all these exhibitions of sincere
devotion to Lord Siva.

ARINDAMA

Gunahina joined the chorus of devotees, chanting repeatedly,
“Hail, Lord Siva!”. As day after day he was fasting, he grew
extremely weak in body but his spiritual strength was growing up
simultaneously.
The sun had set in the west. It was the time of evening prayers.
The devotees were making all the needed preparations to worship
the Lord. It was now getting dark. The worshippers were returning
home after offering their prayers. Not one of them would deign to
share his sacramental oblation (prasadam) with Gunahina, who was
dying of hunger, and even the priests who rendered their regular
offerings to God seemed to take no notice of him. It was now
midnight. The priests were asleep inside the temple.
Gunahina entered the sanctum sanctorum. The flame near
the Linga was about to be extinguished. Tearing a piece of his
upper cloth, Gunahina made a wick of it and saw to it that the light
did not go out. Driven by his hunger, he stole the pot containing
the oblation. As he was running away with it, accidentally his foot
struck against a sleeping devotee who raised an alarm. He was
chased by the watchmen and killed by their arrows.
The pot with the holy food seemed to be shedding tears for
the dead man. It was sorry because it could not feed a hungry devotee
of Lord Siva. At the same time it blessed him that soon he would
attain to the beatific union with Lord Siva. Accordingly, at the hour
of the rise of the Linga, Gunahina gained the grace of God. The
retinue of Lord Siva congratulated him on his blissful accomplishment.

29

By the grace of Lord Siva, Gunahina became the king of
Kalinga, in his next birth, and bore the name, Arindama. A staunch
devotee of the Lord, he was always engaged in devotional and
charitable activites.
Arindama was so imbued with the universality of god-head
that he made no distinction between Siva and Vishnu. He was
universally known for his magnanimity, and his kingdom was the
most prosperous in the world.
On the next Maha Sivaratri day he was united in spirit with
Lord Siva.
In his following birth Arindama was born as the son of
Brahma’s “mental offspring” (manasa putra), Paulastya. He was
known as Visravasu. In this existence also Visravasu was entirely
devoted to Lord Siva. He had two wives; by the elder one he
sired Vaisravana; by the younger one, three sons, named Ravana,
Kumbhakarna and Vibhishana.

CITY OF LANKA
Vaisravana prayed Lord Siva for a long while. Pleased with
his devotion, the Lord ordered Visvakarma to build a beautiful town
in the middle of the Indian ocean and ceded it to Vaisravana. It was
known as Lanka, reputed for its riches and splendour.
Ravana was a wicked man, who was guilty of all the seven
deadly sins. He was unbearably jealous of the glory of the city of
Lanka, and wanted to win it and rule it. He wanted to usurp his
step-brother by hook or by crook.
Eventually Ravana succeeded in driving away his half-brother,
Vaisravana, from Lanka. Lord Siva would not intercede on behalf
of Vaisravana, because Ravana, for all his vices, was also a devotee
of His. It is only because Lord Siva is so lenient towards His devotees
of all kinds that He is known as “Bhola Sankar” (the innocuous
Sankar).

30

31

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Running away from Lanka, Vaisravana built the city of Varanasi,
where Lord Siva once cut off one of Brahma’s five heads. The city
was spread over an area of twenty-four square miles.

towards the worthy people. Now seek the forgiveness of this
motherly figure of whom you have been needlessly envious”.
Vaisravana duly fell prostrate at the feet of Parvati and begged her
pardon.

In that holy city Vaisravana consecrated not only the idol of
Lord Siva, in the form of “Prana Linga” (symbol of universal life),
also that of His consort, in the form of “Para Devata” (the supeme
Sakti).
Standing on one leg, and fasting, Vaisravana prayed Lord
Siva for a long duration. He was much emaciated in the process.
Delighted with his austerities, Lord Siva, presented Himself, along
with His consort, before him, and asked him to seek whatever
favours he wanted. Dazzled by the divine brilliance, Vaisravana
replied that all that he wanted was the good fortune of serving
the Lord. Further pleased with Vaisravana’s selfless devotion,
the Lord granted him the power of clairvoyance.
Then Vaisravana’s eye fell on the resplendently lovely figure of
Parvati, the consort of Lord Shiva. He began to think; “Who could
be this embodiment of womanly perfection? Indeed, how magnificent
should have been her worship of Lord Shiva! How did she manage
to entice the Lord? Is her worship greater than my penance? Else
how is it that the Lord took her so close to His bosom”.
Judging Vaisravana’s looks properly, the divine consort was
much angered. Her angry look at him caused his left eye to be
broken. She asked her Lord who this jealous man was. Then the
Lord said; “Dear, if you, the divine Mother, do not forgive the sins
of the devotee, who else would come to his rescue? Please do
forgive him, at least for my sake!”.
The goddess was pacified.
Lord Siva told Vaisravana: “Be the Lord of the heavenly clans
of Yaksha, Kinnara and Gandharva. You will be the master and
owner of the nine kinds of precious riches. You will also be my
lifelong friend. May your wealth be the source of charity and goodwill

Then the goddess spoke to Vaisravana: “Forgive you I will, no
doubt. But because of your initial petty-mindedness you will be
known as ‘kubera’ (Kutsitam beram yasya sah). Anyway, the
boons you receive from my Lord will give you good results. Live up
to the good intentions of yours, which made you worthy of receiving
them!”.
Blessing Kubera, the blessed divine couple left for their
heavenly abode.
Later the reddish blue Rudra, along with his retinue, landed on
the terrace of the alabaster palace situated in the pleasure garden in
the outskirts of the city of Alaka. All the sages in and around that
kingdom of Kubera, the Siddhas, the Vedic seers, Brahma and
Vishnu came to pay their respects to Rudra. Kubera offered his
hospitally to all the visitors, and was further favoured by the grace
of Lord Siva. The visitors pronounced that all those who hear the
story of Kubera would be equally blessed.

MANMATHA (CUPID)
Manmatha is none other than the son of Lord Vishnu. He has
the power to pollute the minds of even the Trinity, by aiming his flowerarrows at them.
On a certain day, at evening, Brahma, just for the fun of it,
created a beautiful girl, by name Sandhya (the name itself means
‘evening’). Indeed, no prettier woman was ever before seen in
heaven or on earth or in the nether world. Her each single move
was immensely delighting the on lookers.
Manmatha, without weighing the pros and cons, cast his arrows
at the Lord Creator, Brahma, who, in turn unmindful of his incestuous

32

33

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

inclination, fell in love with Sandhya. Likewise, the minor creators
(Upa-Brahmas), created by Brahma, also were the target of Cupid’s
arrows and entertained passionate thoughts towards Sandhya.

Then Brahma turned to Vasishtha: “Revered sage, Sandhya is
performing a great penance with goddess Parvati in mind. Go and
teach the ‘five-lettered’ mantra (Panchaakshari) of Lord Siva
NAMAH SIVAYA to her”.

Bothered by the impassioned attentions of all these people,
Sandhya sought the refuge of Lord Siva. The Lord advised her to
worship His consort, Parvati.
Then Lord Siva spoke to Brahma: “You, sir, aren’t you
surprised that you became an easy target to Manmatha’s arrows?
Don’t you realise that you have fallen in love with your own creation,
Sandhya, who is virtually your daughter? Is it right that you, who
should guide others along the right lines, yourself became a slave to
beastly desire? Please behave yourself, and get rid of this delusion”.
Later the Lord spoke similarly to the Upa-Brahmas, reminding
them that Sandhya was their sister.
All of them were ashmed of themselves and begged the Lord’s
forgiveness.
Brahma was angry with Manmatha and cursed him to be
consumed by the fire of Lord Siva’s third eye.
Then Manmatha said: “Lord, when you created me, did you
not, along with Vishnu and siva, tell me that I would be capable of
deluding the entire creation, including the Trinity, the demi-gods, the
demons and the denizens of both earth and heaven? I only wanted
to test my powers. What wrong have I done in doing my appointed
duty?”
But Brahma reminded him that once he uttered the curse it
could not be taken back. However, Manmatha was assured that he
would regain his original body, after the wedding of Lord Siva.
In the meantime before he could be destroyed by the third eye
of Lord Siva Manmatha was granted by Brahma the facility of being
wedded to Rati Devi, the daughter of Daksha. Manmatha thanked
Brahma and retired to his home along with his bride.

Vasishtha did as he was told. After Sandhya started chanting
‘Namah Sivaaya’ for a while, the Lord appeared before her. The
delighted Sandhya requested Him that she be granted another birth,
in which she would be entirely devoted to her spouse.
Lord Siva said: “Your wish will be fulfilled. On the banks of
the river chandra bhaga, Medhatithi is performing a sacrificial rite.
Unseen by others, jump into his sacrificial fire, the while mentally
nothing the name of the one whom you wish to marry. That person
would eventually become your husband”.
After Lord Siva disappeared, Sandhya fancied Vasishtha for
her spouse, and thinking of him jumped into the ritual fireplace
(Homa-Kunda).
The sun-god cut the burnt body of Sandhya into two, and
made of one piece the morning twilight, in favour of the demi-gods,
and of the other, the evening twilight, in favour of the forefathers.
He turned her soul into a different girl Arundhati. He presented
Arundhati to Medhatithi. But that sage thought Vasishtha was the
most deserving lifemate for her, and accordingly, performed the
wedding of Arundhati and Vasishtha.
The newly married couple were spending their time in tender
mutually and with the observance of all the prescribed duties of
householders. Sage Sakti and others were born to that blessed
couple.

SATI DEVI
Brahma is by nature fickle-minded. He thought that the love
he and his sons had bestowed on Sandhya was the result of
Manmatha’s flower-arrow attack, and that he was needlessly shamed

34

35

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

by Lord Siva in the eyes of the world. Thus he was bent on avenging
his discomfiture, and wanted to see Lord Siva also fall a prey to
feminine wiles as he and his sons did. Accordingly, he approached
Manmatha for co-operation in his scheme. Manmatha said that he
needed the help of springtide to make his arrows effective in
disturbing the mind of Siva. So Brahma, by virtue of his creative
powers, caused the Malaya winds to blow and all nature to blossom
in its plenty following which, the god of springtime presented himself
before Brahma and Manmatha.

very existence to Him, can abuse him with impunity? If you really
want to get Him married to one of your own creation, you must
ask to pray to Parameswari, the divine mother, directly. Then, on
receiving the needed boon from the mother, he would be able to
sire Sati Devi, the intended bride of Lord Siva, She will verily be
the incarnation of the Sakti, attribute of the Lord and exercise her
faminine influence on His mind”.

Pleased with this eventuality, Brahma told Manmatha: “Friend,
Vasantha (god of springtime) is ready to accompany you. Also take
your bride with you and cast your arrows on Siva. When he feels the
defect of your attack, I shall create a suitable woman as His wife”.
Rati and Manmatha, followed by the Malaya winds and the
spring-god, set off on their errand. The whole neighbourhood was
aglow with the flowering of nature, and the bees and the cuckoos
were making their love-breeding music. The gentle breezes, coupled
with the freshly aroused flora and fauna, incited the males and the
females of all species to join in blissful sexual union. The Manmatha
couple tried every single trick of theirs to discomfit Siva, but he had
not budget an inch and was completely immersed in his Yogic
communion.
Thankful that, at least, they were spared the danger of getting
burnt by the rays of Siva’s fiery third eye, Rati and Manmatha
returned to Brahma and reported their failure.
Brahma was sorely disappointed. He went up to Lord Vishnu
and, narrating all that happened, sought His assistance.
Thereupon Vishnu chided him: “My dear fellow, have you
forgotten all about the mighty power of Lord Siva? Do you think
you can put to shame that great god, who is the primordial Almighty,
the saviour of the devotees, the self-effulgent and self-existent
Absolute? Do you deceive yourself that you and I, who owe our

Brahma then duly commissioned Daksha to do the needful.
Daksha performed the requisite penance. In due course Mother Sakti
with Her black complexion, crimson eyes, luxuriant tresses and the
protection-assuring thousand hands-presented Herself before him.
The gratified Daksha then prayerfully requested Her to extend Her
infinite grace to him. Pleased with his supplication, she asked him to
express his wishes. Daksha replied: “Mother Sakti, Lord Siva is now
engaged in Yogic communion, as the offspring of Brahma, in the form
of Rudra. If you think that I am worthy of receiving your grace, kindly
become my daughter and then marry Him for the salvation of the
entire world of virtue and for the destruction of the evil-minded”.
The Sakti said: “I appreciate your intentions and will be born as
your daughter. I will perform a great penance to obtain the favours of
Lord Siva. But there is one condition. If ever you dishonour me, I
shall cease to exist there and then, and will be reborn in another form.
Now go home and await my birth through your wedded wife”. So
saying, the goddess disappeared.
Mother Sakti entered the mind of Daksha in all Her grace and
majesty. He then transferred that supreme presence in him to his
spouse, Virini, who duly conceived the divine child.
After nine months, Virini was delivered of a dazzlingly beautiful
female child. All over the reach the news spread that a divinely
resplendent child was born to Daksha and Virini. The proud parents
celebrated the birth of that incarnation of Mother Sakti by offering
various kinds of gifts to the chaste ladies and the noble scholars,

36

37

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

and feeding the poor and the needy. The newborn was christened
Sati Devi.

The maids were all admiration for Sati’s artistic ability. They
were wondering who that personage in the picture could be who so
took their friend’s fancy.

Sati Devi was regaling the entire palace with her precocious
little pranks. Her favourite toy is an image of Siva. She would caress
it with fond cries of “Siva! Siva!”. She would even utter the name of
the Lord in her dreams. And she could always be coaxed into eating
her food, by chanting the name ‘Siva’ in her presence. Naturally
everyone who saw her realised that she would be a great devotee
of Lord Siva.

THE PAINTING
None can check the march of time. Sati Devi came of age.
Her main hobby was painting. She would order the servants to
keep her in constant supply of paints and brushes. At night she
would order for brighter and brighter lights.
Sati would draw one imaginary picture of the Lord; not pleased
with the first effort, she would make another try. Whenever a visitor
asks her to identify the picture she would bashfully say “that is His”,
without naming the Lord directly. When pressed for the revelation
of the real name, she would close her eyes with her hands and
chuckle shyly.
Indeed that painting turned out to be a masterpiece of Art.
Painted in variegated hues, it was a perfect representation of the
Lord in all his splendour: the braid adorned on one side by the
crescent moon and on the other by the river Ganga; the two eyes
in the normal position, half-closed; the third eye in the forehead,
shining brightly; the mark of dark colour in the throat (which
resulted from the drinking of the poisonous Haalaahala); the snakeornament hanging round the neck, along with the Aksha garland;
in the right hand, the rosary and the spear; in the left hand, the
staff; the waist covered by deer-skin; and anklets on the feet. By
the side of the Lord appears the Kamandalu (begging bowl of the
monk).

After the daily ablution, Sati would adorn herself impeccably,
and then pray to the Lord’s image in the painting, burning incense
and offering a garland of higly perfumed flowers. Offering the
consecrated food, she would try to persuade the Lord to accept
and eat it. In her zealous imagination she would feel that the Lord
was gladly receiving the food she gave Him. When she loses herself
in a fit of ecstasy, she would find Him vanish, and that would make
her dejected. she would appeal to her maids to join her in searching
the pleasure-garden to see if Lord Siva was hiding behind some
tree or bush. When they dissuade her that the time was not yet ripe
for her to find her Lord, she would be disappointed. To be rid of
her desolation, she would go to her painting, and gazing at it with
intense longing, take up the lute. Playing the Veena, she would also
sing in the highest octave such songs as are dear to the Lord.
Wondering at her own inspired vocalisat ion and
instrumentation, Sati thought that it was all the result of the Lord’s
invisible appreciation of her talent. She felt reassured that the Lord
in her picture would be her real lifemate.

THE NANDA VOW
Sati Devi decided to perform the Nanda consecration, because
it is traditionally held that the girl who celebrates that vow would be
favoured with the husband of her choice. Her parents agreed with
her intentions.
After Sati started her vow in right earnest, Vishnu went up to
Lord Siva and said: “Lord, Sati Devi has begun the Nanda penance
to seek your hand. She is verily the embodiment of divine, virtue,
majesty and devotion. There is none in heaven or on earth to rival
her in any good aspect. Aren’t you committed to fulfilling the just
wishes of your devotees? so, may I request you to accept Sati’s
hand without further delay?”

38

39

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Lord Siva was easily persuaded and went down to meet Sati
Devi, soon after she finished her Nanda Vrata. Seeing Him, Sati
was enraptured. As she touched His feet in revential love, tears of
ecstasy rolled down her cheeks. She said: “Lord, have you come
to fulfil my earnest wish and answer my sincere prayers? Oh how
long have I been praying for your favour! Lord, kindly promise me
that you grant my wish to be your life-partner and do give me the
opportunity of serving you with love and devotion!

austerities, you do not need silken garments, and the deerskin suits
you best. Whether the husband earns his bread by begging or by
any other means, it matters little to the chaste wife whose sole concern
is to please him with her obedience and affection. So please do not
test me any more, and accept me and my honest love”.

TEST
Lord Siva’s heart mounted. Smilingly, he replied: “Dear Sati,
how innocuous and ingenuous you are, indeed! Else, why would
such an accomplished girl like you love someone like me? I am
extremely poor, Would not Ganga in my braid constantly quarrel
with you, if you were to be my wife? Even the moon in my hair
would pester you with his cool rays; the snakes round my neck will
scare you away. My fingers are always engaged in holding my
weapons or in praying to Lord Rama, by turning and counting the
beads of the rosary. My waist is covered by the prickly deer-skin
My means of livelihood is begging. My favourite sojourn is the burialground. My decoration is smearing myself with ash. I am ever
obedient to my devotees, and will leave you very frequently to answer
their supplication. So be welt advised and don’t entertertain the
idea of throwing in your lot with such a person as I!”.
Sati was griefstruck. She pleaded: “Lord, is it fair on your part
to make fun of me or to test me like this? I am not all that innocent
or ignorant. I know what I want and what sort of life I will have to
lead in your company. It is only are the greatest of the Trinity of
gods; you, who have the power of destruction and of re-creation,
what use have you for material wealth? Why should I fall out with
Ganga, whom I will gladly worship? And as long as I have you near
me, how can the snakes frighten me? Lord Rama is as much my
own guardian angel as yours. You who are ever immersed in

ASSENT
Lord Siva smiled. Taking it as a sign of his agreement, Sati fell
at his feet with grateful self-surrender. The Lord fondly took her
into His arms. Sati forgot herself in her beatific ecstasy and by the
time she shook herself the Lord vanished.
The maids approached Sati, she looked at them with a quiet
smile on her lips, for she was reminding herself of the ecstatic
moments she spent in her Lord’s embrace. Asked the reason for
her pleased looks and smiles, Sati revealed the truth to them in a
whisper. The maids said they would convey the good news to her
mother. Sati shyly protested. But the maids took her along to the
palace to meet her parents and inform the latter of the happy events.
Daksha then went to Brahma: “Sire, my daughter is determined
to marry Lord Siva and none else. You must arrange the wedding of
Lord Siva and hers”.
Brahma gladly accepted to be the instrument in bringing about
their union. When he called on Lord Siva, the latter told him:
“Brahma, Sati is adamant about marrying me. If I do not marry her,
she may cause herself some extreme harm. So go and tell Daksha
not to come in the way of our marriage”.
Brahma was glad that Lord Siva Himself suggested what the
former wanted him to do. Vishnu was pleased that his plan bore
fruit of seeking Lord Siva become a slave to the tender passion.
Brahma made all the arrangements for the wedding of Sati and Siva;
for the that purpose he obtained the ready acquiescence of Daksha,
and conveyed that news to Siva.

40

41

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

WEDDING INVITATION

The wedding party ceremonially marched to the superbly
decorated wedding hall, to the accompaniment of band music.
All the guests were seated in the places befitting their respective
station. They were greeted with the sprinkling of perfumed water,
sandalwood paste and flowers.

Sage Narada came into the presence of Lord Siva. Siva told
the sage; “Narada, the daughter of Daksha has fallen in love with
me. Daksha extended an invitation to me through Brahma to go to
his realm and get married to his daughter. On my behalf please
invite Brahma and Sarasvati Vishnu and Lakshmi, the heavenly sages
and angels to attend our wedding”.
All the invitees arrived at the Silver Mount.
The next morning the auspicious reveille was sounded. Lord
Siva was anointed and given an oil bath. Then he was bedecked with
appropriate ornaments. Lakshmi and Sarasvati presided over the
arrangments that were in charge of the women for the wedding
celebration. The wedding procession was led by Brahma and Vishnu.
The Pramatha hordes blow the conches.
Brahma and Vishnu exchanged meaningful glances smilingly;
seeing them Lord Siva understood that they were enjoying a silent
joke at His expense, because He formely childed them for falling
a prey to the wiles of Manmatha (and now He Himself followed
in their footsteps!). Actually, Siva was very impatient to meet Sati
Devi. The whole Silver Mount seemed to be infused with blissful
delight and to be awaiting the union of Siva and Sati on its hallowed
ground.

WEDDING OF SATI AND SIVA
After supervising all the wedding arrangements and finding them
to his satisfaction, Daksha went forward to receive the bridegroom
and His wedding party. Performing the proper “Varapuja” (worship
of the groom), Daksha escorted the wedding party to their various
allotted residential quarters and saw to it that they were well attended
upon by his men.
Then Daksha bade the Trinity a special welcome and thanked
them for gracing the occasion.

All the guests were eagerly awaiting the arrival of the
bridegroom. As Lord Siva entered the hall with a bright and
benevolant smile on His lips, the whole essembly stood on their feet
and greeted Him with folded hands. He was escorted by the priests
to the wedding altar and seated on a golden plank.
Here Sati was simultaneously being escorted by the
bridesmaids to the wedding altar. She was bedecked with many
tastefully precious ornaments. The chaste housewives followed
her, carrying with them all the time-honoured and traditional material
meant for the auspicious celebration of the wedding.
Lakshmi and Sarasvati went up to Sati, greeted her with fond
respect and seated her on the golden plank, by the side of Lord
Siva.
Daksha, along with his wife, bowed to the feet of the Trinity
and then proceeded to perform the wedding, assisted by the Vedic
scholars and the holy priests. Daksha and his spouse then washed
the feet of Siva with consecrated water in a golden plate, and then
sprinkled it over their heads. Then, dipping Sati Devi’s hand in milk,
they placed it in the hands of Lord Siva. Siva and Sati, by joining
their hands, became man and wife, to be united for ever in holy
matrimony.
The whole assembly clapped their hands in jubilation, and the
hall reverberated with the music of the special orchestra and with
the chanting of the Vedic wedding hymns.
The bride and the bridegroom garlanded each other, while
looking smilingly into each other’s eyes. The snakes around Siva’s
neck bowed to the feet of Sati, swearing their allegience to her

42

43

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

thereby. The angels in heaven dropped flower-petals on the newly
wedded blessed couple.

again. The motive behind this overt gesture is known to their spouses,
the Trinity, who were suppressing their sardomic smiles skilfully.

Daksha gave appropriate gifts to the Scholars and to the invited
guests. He once again offered special thanks to the Trinity of gods.

All the guests went back to their respective homes, after
receiving rich gifts from the Lord of Wealth, and Siva’s friend,
Kubera. Siva told Sati about His friendship with Kubera.

THE RETURN JOURNEY
The next day Daksha bade farewell to the newly wed. The
divine couple were preceded by the Pramatha hordes, and followed
by Brahma and Vishnu and their consorts.
As Daksha and his wife were disconsolate, while their daughter
was taking her tearful leave of them, Siva assured the parents that
He would take good care of the daughter.
Sati and Siva were seated in a pearl palanquin, as they were
lifted up to their Mount Kailaasa, which bade a fitting welcome to
them.

Commissioning Nandi to stand guard at the outer door, Siva
took Sati to the pleasure garden.
There the rivers Nanda and Alakananda are swelling at high
tide, and seem to be shouting “Siva!” with reverential pride. There
you can see the marble steps paved down to the waters of the river
to facilitate Sati’s progress towards taking a dip in them. There the
nymphs are playing, with glee, acquatic games. The elephants which
drink of those waters raise their trunks with gay abandon, and are
trumpeting in high spirits. Even the heavenly denizens renounce their
kingdom to enjoy the benefit of bathing in those twin rivers.

As the blessed couple entered their own abode, the gods in
heaven again showered flowers of blessing on themAt the threshold,
the couple were asked to put the right foot forward, while stepping
inside, after the noble ladies offered the traditional incense of
welcome to the bride and groom. Following the time-honoured social
custom, the guests and inmates pressed the newly wed to speak
each other’s name aloud. Brahma and Vishnu suggested that Sati
should first speak out the name of her husband, whereas their
consorts said that it was Siva’s duty to tell His wife’s name at first.

Nearby is the Saugandhika grove with its all-yielding Kalpa
Vriksha and other fruitful trees.

After some cajoling, Sati was the first to speak: “Sadasiva”
(the Eternal Lord of Bliss). Siva followed suit, by saying “Sati Devi”
(the goddess of the eternally existing, virtue-symbolising Feminine).

Sati Devi asked her Lord to teach her how the people who
are caught in the web of recurring birth and death could be saved.

All the guests entered the godly dwelling to participate in the
‘housewarming’ function. Sati imagined the primal mate of Siva,
Mahesvari, in Lakshmi and Sarasvati; in their turn, Lakshmi and
Sarasvati saw Mahesvari in Sati Devi. Consequently, one was seen
to be saluting the other with utmost devotion and respect, again and

Under a banyan tree, Siva was indulging himself in His loveplay with Sati. As one sees that Lord, one cannot praying to Lord
Rama, the personification of love, truth and goodness. Indeed, how
incomparable must to be the majesty and greatness of Rama who
could inspire the devotion of the greatest god among the Trinity!

SPIRITUAL GUIDANCE

Lord Siva said: “It is the knowledge of one’s real Self that
enables one to be freed from the bondage of Samsara (the cycle
of birth, death and rebirth). True knowledge is that which makes
the knower see every one and every thing in God, and God in every
one and every thing. If one thinks that his self is separate from the
Universal Self, one falls a prey to the attacks of ignorance and

44

45

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

nescience. By knowing the all-knower through non-dual selfawareness, one has nothing else to learn, because the Knower of
the Knowledge. In other words, in the spiritual sense, the individual
empirical self and the universal transcendental Self are one and the
same, albeit the differences of name and form exist on the material
plane of manifestation. While the acquisition of self-knowledge. This
devotion has nine forms: hearing about God, remembering Him,
Chanting His name, serving Him, obeying Him, Worshipping Him,
bowing to Him, befriending Him and surrender oneself to Him. At
the final stage of self-surrender, the devotee qualifies himself for the
non-dual consciousness of the God within. He no longer needs to
pray to an entity outside of Him, but has to be in constant communion
with God as his own inner Self. His external devotion and good
works are merely meant for the guidance of the laymen around him.
The man who realised his real self is automatically liberated from
the bonds of the false universe so, till seeker attains this selfidentifying status, he should ever be engaged in praying to me. I am
always at the back and call of the true devotee, and by being sincerely
and actively devoted to me one can before long gain Salvation. As
you know, formerly I had obliged even the evil devotees of mine, as
in the case of Ravana. In order to save the ordinary gods of heaven
from the poisonous fire of ‘Halahala’. I ate it up at their request.
True devotion is the reason behind all this”.

A great sacrifice was begun in that pilgrim centre on the
auspicious occasion of Makara Sankranti (when the sun enters
the northern solstice). In order to obtain the benefit of at once
witnessing that mighty Yajna and of taking a dip in the holy ‘Trinity’
(the confluence of the three rivers), all the supreme denizens of the
celestial regions visited the place.

Sati Devi was immensely delighted to learn from her Lord about
the efficacy of honest devotion. Likewise she was initiated by Lord
Siva in the secrets of all arts and science along with the duties of
men and women towards one another.
Thus in happy and intellectual companionship were the divine
couple glorying for some time.

SACRIFICIAL RITE (YAJNA)
Now let us proceed to the holy city of prayaga. It is the site of
the confluence of the sacred rivers-Ganga, Yamuna and Sarasvati.

Along with the Vedic chanting of the sages could be heard the
heavenly music of the Gandharvas. The dances of the Apsara nymphs
provided a nobly entertaining backdrop for the delectation of the
lay pilgrims.
The various priestly authorities saw to it that all the format
paraphernalia were duly arranged.
While the initiator of the sacrifice, and the conductor of the
sacrifical proceedings attended the function, and all sages and
devotees of the region gathered there, Daksha had not yet presented
himself.
Brahma presided over the Yajna. Next to him sat Lord Siva.
The oblation had to be offered by Daksha. That was why the
assembly was impatiently awaiting his arrival. After a while, there
was a great commotion. Daksha was arriving on the scene,
accompanied by his disciples, with much fanfare. The sages and the
priests received him with full sacramental honours. The gods
garlanded him. Daksha acknowledged with gratitude the honour
done him. Then saluting Brahma, Daksha sat next to him. Siva did
not greet Daksha, and mistaking the Lord’s silence for an insult,
Daksha lost his temper.

ABUSING LORD SIVA
The angry Daksha stood up and addressed the assembly as
follows: “Learned sages, while you were all respectfully greeting
me, my own son-in-law, Siva, would not even deign to look at me.
A father-in-law must be treated like a Guru (master). Well, perhaps

46

47

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

a man whose favourite haunts are the burial-grounds cannot be
expected to know the way he should conduct himself in an assembly
of this kind. It was my fault that I should have offered my dear
daughter to such an ill-mannered person. My hope that he would
reform himself after the marriage was belied. If I greeted Brahma
first, it was only because he conferred on me the honour of
‘Prajapathi’ (the lord of men). I had no need to accost Siva myself;
it was his duty to salute me in the first place. So I am going to place
a curse on him now”.

think that you are greater than the sages and the gods, may you for
ever be denied their oblations! May you be banished from all
sacrificial rites!”.

Brahma and Vishnu felt that this abuse of Siva was unjustified,
and thought that they themselves were dishonered by implication.
They realised that anger, man’s worst foe, would deprive even a
‘Prajapati’ of his sense of proportion.
Then Brahma spoke to Daksha: “Sir, you seem to forget,
yourself. You have not thought twice before resorting to an abuse of
Lord Siva. Know both Siva and Vishnu to be my worshipful
masters. After all, Siva was not guilty of any impropriety. There is
no rule that a son-in-law should be the first to greet the father-inlaw, Don’t think that Siva is an ordinary person. He is indeed
worshipped by me and Vishnu. Besides, any insult to him applies to
the other two of us, in the Trinity. You have made a great mistake
and now must face the consequences”.

FORBEARANCE
Lord Siva was still keeping quiet. He had not cared to open
His third eye. But He was aware of Daksha’s early mis-demeanour,
in not accosting Him before his seat by the side of Brahma. That
was the reason why He did not look at Daksha. Although Siva
knew that Daksha must be rightaway punished for his impertinence,
he did not take any extreme step out of consideration for the feelings
of Sati Devi who might not like to see her father suffer.
But Daksha misunderstood Siva’s silence. He directly
addressed the Lord: “Sir, you are an unrefined person. You who

The unwise words of Daksha struck the hearts of the sears
like thorns. And yet they dared not chide Daksha. The heart of the
sacred bull, Nandi, seemed to be broken. He was distressed to see
that Daksha, who should ever remain obedient to Siva, had indeed
ventured to insult the Lord. So he reprimanded Daksha: “You evilminded fellow, how dare you imprecate the noblest of all gods, the
most benevolent saviour, the teacher of your master Barhma, to be
underserving of sacrificial oblations? I say, may you never be able
to master self-knowledge! May you for ever be bound by the
shackles of a householder’s life! May you always be ensnared by
the wiles of women! Daksha, soon you will be bleating like a goat.
You will be enmeshed in the vicious circle of Samsaara”.
Daksha rejoined: “Nandi, you spoke like the blind follower of
Siva that you are. I am going to curse that you and your likes will
henceforth be deprived of Vedic studies and practices, and that
you will be going through life by merely smearing yourselves with
ashes. I also imprecate that those who think like you, whether they
be your family and friends or the sages, should not attain beatitude”.
Hearing this wild imprecation, Bhrigu and the other seers were
much frightened and best quiet provoked by Daksha’s words, Nandi
cursed the sages: “May all those people who rejoice in the prattle
of Daksha be debarred from Vedic knowledge! May they ever
remain vagrant, impassioned, indigent and servile! May they nourish
themselves with impure, wretched food and drink!”.
Then Lord Siva tried to pacify His devoted mount: “Dear
Nandi, is it right that you should curse the sages for the folly of
Daksha? The fact that they kept quiet during Daksha’s outburst
must be due to their dutiful allegiance to their chief (Daksha). So
let me amend that only those sages or scholars (Brahmins) who
dishonour or abuse the gods, demi-gods and forefathers be the

48

49

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

ones who will come under the purview of your curse. I, however,
thank you for your uncompromising devotion to me”.

guilty of any disrespect to him? Does not my father realise that by
shaming Siva he is shaming me also at the same time? I shall now go
and tell him what he should do to make amends for his folly”.

Brahma, Vishnu and other, praised Lord Siva for his fortitude
and forgiveness.
Later, Lord Siva returned to Kailasa. The other gods and
guests, too, went back to their respective abodes.

BAD OMENS
The right eye of Sati Devi throbbed. She was much agitated at
this sign of forthcoming misfortune. Lord Siva came to her. She
bowed to Him. Siva informed her about her father’s misbehaviour.
Sati fell in a swoon, hearing the bad news. The Lord did the needful
to see her regain consciousness. Coming to, she requested Lord
Siva to forgive ber father. The benign Siva acceded to her request.
But Daksha was evil-minded. He was still bent upon wreaking
vengeance on Siva. Accompanied by his retinue, he went to the Kanakhala
pilgrim centre to performe the ‘Vaajapeya’sacrifice. He did not extend
and invitation to his daughter and his son-in-law, but invited all other
denizens of paradise, and requested Brihaspati to inaugurate the sacrificial
rituals.

DAKSHA YAJNA
As Siva and Sati were loitering in their pleasure garden, they
overheard the gods jouneying across the celestial path: “Daksha is
performing a great sacrifice and invited us. We are going to witness
it and blessed thereby”.
Sati said to herself: “How foolish is my father! He did not bother
to invite us, his closest relation. Is he under the impression that my
Lord is an ordinary person? Has he forgotten the glad words he
spoke when he offered my hand to Siva that by having Siva for his
son-in-law his life was sanctified? Why was he not convinced by
the counsel of Brahma, Vishnu and the sages that my Lord was not

Turning to her Lord, she said: “Lord, it could be that my father
was too ashamed of himself for having abused you at Prayaaga that
he dared not come here in person to invite you for that Yajna of his.
As for why he did not at least send a messenger for that purpose, it
must be he was not sure we would respond to such an invitation.
You are an ocean of mercy. There have been myraid occasions
when you forgave the people who offened you. I shall now go to
attend the Yajna, and persuade my father to seek you forgiveness.
Kindly permit to do so”.
Siva replied: “Dear Sati, it is but natural that you should hold
your father in high esteem. But I am afraid you cannot convince
him. On the other hand, your going there may even lead to
undesirable consequences. I never want to deny your wishes, but I
think it is my duty to warn you of the possible ill-effects of your
intended visit. Anyway, if you still wish to go, you are free to do so”.

THE IRONY OF FATE
As Siva and Sati were relaxing under banyan tree, the former
felt as though his favourite deity, Rama, was shedding tears of distress,
clad in a monk’s ochre robes. Siva was very much moved by this
mental picture. So, followed by His consort, He left for the Dandaka
forest. There they saw Rama and Lakshmana from a little distance.
Saluting the brothers, from afar, Siva told Sati: “There you see Rama,
with his brother, Lakshmana. Rama’s self-appointed high duty is to
save the virtuous and punish the vicious. He is the incarnation of
Lord Vishnu, and Lakshmana that of Vishnu’s divine ‘bed’, the
thousand-hooded serpent-god, Adisesha. During the absence of
the brothers, the devilish Ravana abducted Sita Devi, the consort
of Rama. Consequently, Rama is in great agony. This moment is

50

51

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

not opportune for us to talk to him directly. So let us bow to him
from this distant spot and go back to our home”.

praises: “Lord, I am able to see the entire world of creation in Thee.
There! I can see the sun and the moon; the Lord Creator Brahma,
the Lord Siva Himself; the thirty million gods in you. In a trillion
forms of creatures, with their countless arms and faces and feet, art
Thou now mirrored. Thou art indeed the Alpha and the Omega of
all creation, and yet Thou hast be beginning or middle or end. I
discern the infinitely iridiscent transfiguration of Thine spreading itself
in the multiplicity of the Rudras, Aadityas, Vasus, Saadhyas,
Asvins, Maruts, Gandharvas, Yakshas and the Titans--- all of
whom are now gazing at Thine awe-inspiring Light of lights. Oh
Lord of grace and mercy, I Knew not Thine absolute power in my
former ignorance; now I realise Thine undening glory; so on my
bended knees I beseech Thy forgiveness”.

Sati was beset by a doubt, and spoke to Siva: “Lord, if Rama,
indeed is the very incarnation of Narayana (Vishnu), why cannot he
by his mere wish go and meet his beloved, wherever she is? Why
should he lament like this, as though he were an ordinary mortal?”.
So saying, even though dissuaded by her Lord, she proceeded to
test Rama.
Verily the feminine weakness in Sati got the better of her right
judgment. Else why would she try to put her husband’s worshipful
Master to any kind of test?
All this was the working of Destiny. Sati assumed the form of
Sita. Seeing her, Lakshmana said: “Brother, there is Sita! It is possible
that Ravana was afraid of being cursed by her, and so let her go.
Come, let us go and receive her with due regard”.
But such tricks as Sati’s would not work with the divine
incarnation like Rama. He realised that it was Siva’s consort who
took the shape of Sita. Still, he went up to meet her. Lakshmana
could not realise the truth.
As Sati bowed to Rama, he said: “O Mother, what made you,
the wife of Siva, assume the form of my wife? What is the reason
behind you leaving your husband and roaming in this wild jungle?
Don’t you know that this place is full of demons? Please be welladvised and go back to Mount Kailasa”.
Sati Devi was amazed. She regretted her ruse, and fell prostrate
at Rama’s feet, begging his pardon. Then Lakshmana also realised
the truth and the might of his divine brother.

LORD’S TRANFIGURATION
(VISVAROOPA SANDARSANAM)
Then Lord Rama displayed his universal manifestation to Sati
Devi. Sati was struck with reverential awe, and sang the Lord’s

Thereafter she went back to her Lord. Siva spoke nothing.
Sati told Him: “My Lord, how absolutely right you were! Rama is
verily Lord Narayana (Vishnu) Himself. That all-merciful deity
degined to display his universal tranfiguration to me. I was thrice
blessed thereby”.
All the same, Sati did not reveal to Siva that she assumed the
form of Sita. How innoucuous she was! Did she really think that she
could hide the truth from that all-seeing, all-knowing divine husband
of hers?
Lord Siva told Sati: “You have been very fortunate to be able
to see that great god’s Vishvarupa. You were indeed for ever
sanctified by being addressed as ‘Mother by that supreme being.
Now, since Vishnu, Brahma and myself are brotherly facets of one
and the same Invisible Existence reflected in the Trinity, virtually
you are my brother, too!”.
Hearing those words of her husband, Sati fell in a swoon. Siva
could sympathise with her, but He could not forgive her disregarding
His advice. Who can fight against the workings of the inexorable
Destiny? He told her when she regained consciousness: “Dear, there
is no use crying over what already happened. All that we can do is

52

53

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

to spend the rest of our lives in the Vaanaprastha way of life,
which requires us to be physically apart from each other”.

In a sullen mood she approached the sacrificial altar. The ritual
assembly, though filled with sages and priests, still looked forlorn.
The Lord of Fire seemed to be accepting the consecrated ghee
poured into the Homa pit, only grudgingly for fear of inviting the
Lords wrath on himself. Neither Brahma nor Vishnu turned up to
receive their due oblations. All the assembled priests and sages were
extremely worried.

Sati thereupon took her Lord’s permission to leave for her
father’s home. There she was affectionately received by her mother,
sisters and friends. Sati Devi began to shed tears of disconsolate
grief. Her mother was heart-broken. She tried to console her
daughter: “Dear child, your father is now stricken in years. He
brought you up properly, no doubt, but he lost his sense of proportion
in dealing with your husband, under a false impression which has
proved to be his undoing as indeed does misapprehension in the
case of every mortal. Your father had turned a deaf ear to all the
wise counsel. hitherto. Anyway, I shall try to convince him of his
folly. Come along with me to the sacrificial altar”.
On seeing Sati, her father did not greet her with affection, On
the contrary, Daksha offened her: “You, why did you come here? I
never invited you. At the sacrificial rite performed in Prayaaga your
husband insulted me. How could that vagabond appreciate my
greatness? I cursed him that he could not share the sacrificial
oblations. That is why he has no right to be here. Being the wife of
such an unworthy person you too are unwelcome here. Go back!”.
Virini tried to intercede on their daughter’s behalf, by
remainding Daksha that it was only because of Lord Siva’s grace
that they could get their daughter to be married to Him. Daksha
was still adamant and refuted his wife’s Vise argument. He forbade
Sati’s entry into the sacrificial hall, and proceeded towards the altar
with his eyes bloodshot.
Sati was weeping inconsolably, and realised that her Lord was
right in envisaging Daksha’s unthinking obstinacy. Already, by testing
Lord Rama against the will of her husband, she antagonised Him.
Now, dishonoured by her own father, she felt she could not return
to her and and face Him with dignity.

As Sati entered the hall, everyone, excepting her father, stood
up in her honour. Daksha was dissatisfied with the regard which the
assembly displayed indirectly for Lord Siva and directly for His
spouse. However, he kept mum, not even turning his face towards
his daughter, and was earnestly gazing at the sacrificial altar.
Sati addressed her father: “Father, there is no sacred code of
which you are really unaware. You seem to be too proud of the fact
that you are Brahma’s ‘mental offspring’ and the ruler of living
creatures (Prajaapati). But don’t you see that your overweening
pride and abuse of Lord Siva have brought things to such a pass as
to make Brahma and Vishnu refuse to enter this hall in order to
receive their apportioned oblations? I do not mind the disrespect
you have shown me but I cannot tolerate your abuse of my Lord.
Lord Siva is indeed so gracious as to forgive the sinners and the
people who abuse Him if they seek His refuge.
“By coming here against His will I have offened Him. Now
you have put me to shame by not even designing to look at me. I
have no more use for this wretched life of mine. I have no choice
but to jump into the ritual fire”.
The sages for their part refused to take further part in a Yajna
which was not graced by the acceptance of the sacrificial offerings
by Brahma and Vishnu, and left for their respective hermitages.
The sacrificial hall looked barren.
Sati again spoke to her father: “Sir, men like you cannot
appreciate the greatness of the likes of my husband. Wise men ignore

54

55

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

other’s follies and consider their virtues, even going to the extent of
reforming the sinners. Indeed, there is nothing surprising about your
insulting the great Siva the two syllabus of whose name save the
person who merely utters them with sincere conviction and
consecration. I no longer want to be known as your daughter, no
longer like the idea of my Lord calling me “Daakshaayani” (daughter
of Daksha). So I shall burn up this body which you begot”.

wondering whether they would consume the whole world, besides
the physical frame of Sati. Daksha was looking on helplessly and
aimlessly.

So speaking, Sati fell in a swoon. Regaining consciouness after
a while, she felt the presence of her Lord before her. She then told
Him: “ Lord, I was guilty of disobeying Thee in testing Lord Rama.
I have also come here against Thy will. Forgive me for these lapses.
I am now ending this present corporeal existence of mine. My only
prayer is that Thou grantest that I shall be Thy lifemate in the next
birth of mine”.
Lord-Siva was moved. “Dear, do not grieve for the past. You
were actually fortunate in being able to see Lord Rama in person. I
do not like to desert you. It is only the decree of Fate that all this
happened as it did. I will definitely grant your worthy wish. I have
also no grouse against your father. It was also Destiny that misled
him. The time is fast approaching for him to realise his folly. As for
your decision to deliver up your present existence to the Fire-God,
Let your conscience lead you. Take my blessings”. As she was
thinking her Lord, He disappeared.
Then Sati turned northwards, and sat in quiet meditation for a
few minutes. With her Lord’s figure in mind, she drew up the ‘Praana’
and the ‘Apaana’ vital breaths from the region of her navel towards
the region of her heart; mingling the vital breaths with intellect, she
let them pass through the throat to the mid-brow region. Thereupon
she let the flow of the wind-cum-fire power suffuse her entire being.
All that she could visualise were the lotus-feet of Lord Siva.
The flames of the sacrificial fire are rising up to the sky. As Sati
jumped into them, the people who witnessed the event were

Ah, there the noble Sati Devi is offering herself to the
consecrated fire, rather than put up with the humiliation to which
she was subjected by her own father. Verily she is the ideal of all
sublime womanhood, of which the Mother Earth is the source
especially the sacred soil of Mother India. Oh noble Mother Sati,
your self-sacrifice will not be in vain! Surely you will be the literal
‘better half’of Lord Siva, when you emerge with renewed splendour
from these flames to take your new birth.
When Sati’s body was burnt up, there emanated from the fire
a supernatural effulgence which reached up to heaven. All those
that were gathered there bowed to that resplendence with folded
hands, even as then were frightened by that uncanny sight. The sisters
of Sati were Wailing desperately. Lord Siva’s retinue came on the
scene and were about to attack Daksha with their spears and axes.
To ward off their attack, sage Bhrigu offered the needed oblation to
the Dakshina sacred fire. Repelled by the flames emanating from
that holy fire, Siva’s men stepped back.

AERIAL VOICE
With a terrifying tone, an aerial voice then announced: “You
proud Daksha, listen. You brought on yourself disgrace by abusing
Lord Siva, against the advice of every well-wisher of yours, including
sage Dadhichi. You moron, what made you antagonise Sati Devi,
who is not merely your God-given daughter, but also the primal
Energy of the whole animate world, the shining light in the minds of
the supreme saints and the provider of immense benefits to the
worshipful devotees. Indeed, everyone who joined you in this foul
deed of yours, by partaking of this ill-consecrated sacrifice’s
oblations, will all have to pay for their folly along with you”.

56

57

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Terrified by these words, the sages ran up to Lord Vishnu and
begged him to intercede on their behalf.

Lord Siva said: “Virabhadra, I know what you are capable of
doing. Your present purpose is to go, along with Bhadra Kali and
my retinue, to the sacrificial altar of Daksha and cause its ruin and
disorder. Kill all those priests who are still under the command of
Daksha. I assure you no harm will be done to you who are obeying
my orders”.

Daksha, equally frightened, prayed thus to Vishnu: “I pray to
Lord Vishnu, who is clad in the radiant robes that sparkle like lighting,
whose body is dazzlingly dusty like the darkest monsoon cloud,
whose chest is adorned with the brightest flowers of the huge forest,
whose feet resemble the crimson lotus, and whose eyes are like the
selfsame lotus”.
He further requested Vishnu to see that his sacrifice was
properly conducted till the end.
Here the retinue of Siva, who fled from the sacrificial hall of
Daksha, returned to Kailasa and reported to Lord Siva all that
transpired at the sacrifice. And Narada informed Vishnu about Sati
Devi’s self-immolation.
Now the supreme light that emanated from the burning Sati
Devi was reaching up to the celestial region.

BIRTH OF VIRABHADRA
Meanwhile Lord Siva pulled out one braid from the luxuriant
hair-cluster of His head and flung it upon the Silver Mountain. From
the hair-impact arose Virabhadra, with a thousand arms, sharp teeth
and fierce weapons. Simultaneously arose the protection-offering
goddess, Bhadra Kali. Both of them bowed to the Lord and
respectfully sought His orders.
Virabhadra said: “Lord, shall I go and drink up the waters of
the seven seas, or uproot all the mountains standing on earth, or
shatter the trunks of the wild elephants, or persecute the sun, the
moon, the stars, the angels and the arch angels? Being Thine own
highly favoured creation, there is no heroic deed I cannot do and
there is no power on earth or in heaven that can resist my prowess.
Kindly order what I should do right now”.

Accordingly, Virabhadra and Bhadra Kali, accompanied by
Siva’s regular hordes, went down to Daksha’s abode in a chariot
drawn by a thousand lions. As they were journeying down, the entire
space was reverberating with martial music of the conches and drums
being sounded by those ferocious servants of Siva. All over can be
heard their shouts proclaiming: “We are going to punish all those
people who offended our Lord Siva and goddess Sati Devi”.

BAD OMENS
Here Daksha was feeling the foreboding of evil. The sun and
the moon appeared to be losing their brightness. The stars seeming
to be falling. Blood could be seen dropping from the sky. The
dangerous insects were flying about. All around was utter darkness.
The flames that arose from the sacrificial was utter darkness. The
flames that arose from the sacrificial fireplace were simply covered
with smoke-clouds. The locusts entering those flames seemed to
be saying, “What have we got to do with this world bereft of Sati
Devi?”. All those priests and guests, who were not prepared to
offend Daksha and stayed on, were now fleeing in fright from the
hall. Gradually the sacrificial ground was becoming empty. Just then
arrived on the scene the dreadful messengers of Lord Siva, led by
Virabhadra and Bhadra Kali.
But Daksha remained unmoved. Still, he could not help feeling
that Virabhadra came to him like the Lord of Death. Similarly, he
saw in Virabhadra the image of Lord Siva. Knowing that he could
no longer resist the force, of retribution, Daksha prayed to
Virabhadra to mete out the punishment he deserved for his misdeeds.

58

59

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

The spear flung by Virabhadra separated Daksha’s head from his
trunk and the two pieces of his body were flung apart. At the same
time, under the orders of Virabhadra, the retinue of Siva threw out
here and there the oblations offered by the priests, and put out the
sacrificial fire. Following their frightful destruction of Daksha’s
sacrifice, the hordes of Siva began to perform their war-dance.
Both Virabhadra and Bhadra Kali were delighted with the utter
annihilation of the sacrifice of Daksha, caused by Siva’s army.

She was acutally requesting Him to allow her to die along with
Daksha (who was mauled to pieces by Siva’s emissaries), by
committing ‘Sati’ (Sahagamanam).

The wife of Daksha, Virini, begged Virabhadra to put an end
to further desecration and demolition.
Virini is a noble, chaste, sinless woman who had the great good
fortune of conceiving Sati Devi. Besides, she formerly advised her
husband against his thoughtlessness. So Virabhadra respected her
appeal, and returned to Mount Kailasa, along with Bhadra kali and
others. He reported about his sucessful errand to his Lord. Lord
Siva was chanting the name of His favourite deity, Lord Rama.
Accompanied by the sages, Brahma and Vishnu came up to Him.
Lord Siva bade them welcome.
Vishnu told Siva: “Lord, Daksha’s ill-advised actions have been
appropriately punished. It was also decreed by Fate that Sati should
be separated from you. She had burnt herself up, but she will be
reborn as your wife, in the form of Parvati. Daksha’s sacrifice was
originally meant for the benefit of the world. If it does not come to a
successful conclusion, the whole creation will suffer. Therefore we
have come to beseech you to come along with us to Daksha’s
sacrificial hall, and to persuade you to revive Daksha, so that he
can complete his task fruitfully”.

GENEROSITY
Lord Siva, always at the beck and call of His sincere devotees,
left for Daksha’s abode. He was sorry that his messenger Virabhadra
was overzealous in ruining Daksha’s ritual. Moreover he was
particularly grieved to see the plight of the sinless wife of Daksha.

The merciful Siva spoke to Virini: “Mother, none can prevent
the workings of predestination. I never really meant to humiliate
Daksha. When he called on me I was deeply immersed in praying
to Lord Rama, and, therefore, could not get up to welcome him
formally. So he unjustifiably took offence. Even when he insulted
me I kept quiet. I pacified the Nandi who was trying to castigate
Daksha. And yet, Daksha cursed me that I should be unworthy of
receiving sacramental oblations. When Sati came here, despite my
warning that she would be illtreated, Daksha did not realise the
worth of the filial love that brought her here and abused her. She
should have come back to me, but her brave spirit goaded her to
self-immolation. I perfectly know the plight of the one who is
separated from his or her beloved. I admire your wish to join your
husband even in his death. But please take heart, for I will presently
give back to you your husband, brought back to life”.
Virini was enraptured, and bowed to Lord Siva’s feet in utmost
gratification and sincere gratitude. She now believed that the aerial
voice spoke truthfully that Sati would be reborn as the daughter of
mount Himalaya, to be married to Siva.
At Siva’s behest, His men recovered the trunk of Daksha, but
they could not locate his head. Then Siva asked them to bring any
head severed from the body, which they which find in the northern
direction. They found a sheep’s head and grafted it on to Daksha’s
trunk. Daksha came to life, a man who woke up from sleep. Seeing
Lord Siva, he immediately fell at His feet in reverential repentance.
Siva forgave him. The Trinity of gods there upon accepted the ritual
offerings, as the sacrifice was renewed successfully.
All the assembled men, women and children paid their respects
to Siva and received His blessings. At Daksha’s request, Lord Siva

60

61

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

agreed to save the devotees by staying on at the sacrificial altar in
one of His forms, long with His consort, Parvati. Siva also accepted
Daksha’s request that Virabhadra should guard the south-east region
of the universe.

The cows over that mount yield sumptuous, sweet milk for the
anointment of the ‘Linga’of Siva. The Bilva leaves drop of their
own accord in constant supply for the highly favoured prayerful
offerings to the Linga. The beasts, too, join the co-opetative prayer
and sacrificial offerings of the sages and the saints to Lord Siva. In
the middle of the mountain stands a huge banyan tree which spreads
over an area of a hundred square miles.

All returned to their respective abodes.

MOUNT KAILASA
The all-yielding Kalpa trees on Mount Kailasa beckon the
Yogic Siddhas to come and receive from the whatever they wish to
have. The Kinnera girls climb up those divine trees and from there
sing the praises of Lord Siva. The river Nanda flows majestically,
sanctified as it is by the bathing of Sati Devi in it. As the bumblebees hum, the gigantic peacocks dance in gay abandon.
Simultaneously the cuckoos join the bird-orchestra to infuse the
entire surroundings with a heavenly melody and harmony. In the
Nanda river the elephant pairs bathe and indulge in love-sports.
The whole mountain is filled with trees of all known varieties, yielding
every kind of fruit and flower. There is species of bird or beast
unknow to that great mount. The parrots that taste the succulent
grapes chant the hymn to Siva: NAMAH SIVAYA. The mutually
antagonistic animals lose their enmity and play together in those
holy environs. Even the swans gloriously recite the Vedic hymns
hailing Lord Siva (Sata Rudriyam).

Under that sprawling tree-shade sits in meditation the omniscient
Lord Siva He who the embodiment of perfect self mastery; the
quintessence of peacefulness, prayed to by the great sages like
Sanaka and Sanandana and by the master fo wealth, Kubera; the
favoured deity of the world-renouncing saints who adore His matted
tresses, staff, leather-robe, ash-decoration, cresedent-moonadorned hairdo; the perfect form shining with the crimson brightness
of the sky at sundown; and the soulful delight of all devotees.

Indeed the whole living world on that mountain indicates the
awakening of the ‘Serpent power’ (Kundalini) from the subconscient
earth-base (Muladhara) amid the hips and the buttocks, the sensual
centre of the fire-bearing navel region (Svadhishthana), the vitalitysource of the watery ‘Manipura’ in the belly, the devotional airfilled ‘Anahata’ in the lungs, the space-time continuum of the speechgenerating ‘Visuddha’ in the throat, and the all-knowing mental
kingdom (Aajna) between the eyebrows, to the supracosmic selfawareness in the thousand-petalled (Sahasrara) lotus of the brain.

One day Kshupa told Dadhichi: “Dear sage, Siva is the Lord
of the south. But Vishnu is the master of the entire universe. Siva is
the god of the poor. Vishnu is the bestower of all riches. Therefore,
don’t you think Vishnu is greater than Siva?”.

KSHUPA & DADHICHI
Once ther was king named Kshupa. He was a devotee of
Vishnu. He ruled his kingdom dutifully. His realm was prosperous.
When he was not engaged in his kingly duties, Kshupa was in
the habit of hearing sacred discourses, specially delivered by sage
Dadhichi, the son of Chyavana Dadhichi, however, was a devotee
of Siva.

Dadhichi replied: “Sire, how innocuous you are! Do you imagine
that the transitory riches of the world are greater than the eternal
wealth of renunciation? Lord Siva offers the perfect peace of mind
which comes of true knowledge and which is the higest treasure
cherished by all wise men. So it is wiser to pray to Lord Siva”.

62

63

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Angered with these words, Kshupa cut Dadhichi into two
pieces with his Vajra weapon. Later he was contrite, and went to
his palace with an uneasy mind.

themselves into Siva and Vishnu respectively. Dadhichi and Kshupa
hanged their heads in shame.

Dadhichi was man of sagacity and great presence of mind. As
soon as he was attacked, he prayed to his grandfather Sukra, Sukra
taught Dadhichi this death-conquering hymn (Mrityunjaya Mantra);
Tryambakam yajaamahe sugandhim pushti-vardhanam;
Urvaarukam iva bandhnaat mrityoh muksheeya maa amritaat.
(I pray to Lord Siva, who exudes fragrance and enhances
spiritual strength. May He release me as the cucumber is released
from its stem from the clutches of Death, but not from Immortality).
As Dadhichi recited for a long while such scriptural and nonscriptural hymns, Lord Siva presented Himself before that sage and,
bringing him back to life, asked him to seek any favour he wanted
from Him.
Dadhichi requested Lord Siva for a diamond like body and
for immortality, besides a three longed spear (Trisula) for selfprotection. The blessed Lord granted him his wishes.

REVENGE
Bent upon wreaking vengenace, Dadhichi went to the court of
Kshupa and spoke to the king: “Sir, blinded by your royal power,
you cut me into two with your diamond-weapon. My grandfather
initiated me in the Mrintyunjaya Mantra, and by worshipping that
death-queslling God, Siva, I obtained from Him this Trisula. Now
pay for your evil deed”.
So saying, Dadhichi kicked away the crown on Kshupa’s head.
The crown that fell on to the ground seemed to laugh at the king
derisively.Wild with fury, Kshupa hit Dadhichi with his Vajra weapon.
The ‘Trisula’ of Dadhichi gently smiled at the ‘Vajra weapon’ of
Kshupa. The two combatants were unware of the significance of
that smile. Then the Trisula and the Vajra weapon transformed

Vishnu told Kshupa: “You do not appreciate the boundless
glory of the devotees of Siva, By the grace of Lord Siva, His
followers realise salvation, freed from the mantal ills of ignorance,
instability and impurity; for them there is no rebirth, for they are
absolved of all the effects of their past deeds; and they ever rejoice
in the power of self-knowledge. You should be ashamed of yourself
for your unawareness of the efficacy of Siva-worship. Now repent
and make friends with Dadhichi”.
Siva told Dadhichi: “Sir, you should not have wasted the powers
you have acquired through penance on seeking mere vengence.
Lord Vishnu is the preserver and protector of the world of creation.
He creates the kings of the world as his agents in establishing the
rule of law of earth, by protecting the virtous and punishing the
vicious. If there is no poweful king, there is none else who can see
that the sacred works like the sacrificial rites are performed
successfully. In fact, the very Dharma will be in jeopardy if the king
is harmed. There is no meaningful difference between Siva and
Vishnu. You have now learnt your lesson. Now you and Kshupa
should once again be friends”.
When Siva and Vishnu disappeared from the scene, Kshupa
and Dadhichi in their newly acquired knowledge once again became
good friends.

THE HIMALAYAS
The effulgent energy that arose from the sacrificial fire into which
Sati Devi threw herself is now reaching the Himalayas.
Loftiest of them all are Himalayan peaks.
It is here that roam about the royal swans in the soft waves of
the divine stream, Ganga; it is here that the heavenly minstrels the
Gandharvas, pluck the golden lotuses in the lakes for their garlands;

64

65

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

it is here that the Vidyadhara couples wander, counting the number
of pillars erected round the sacrificial altars on earth; here it is that
the aborigines hunt the mighty elephants; and it is here, by meditating
on the foot prints of Lord Siva, that the sages acquire the eight
miraculous powers.

their seats, in honour of the sages. They were indeed unaware of
the powers of penance of the sages. The sages thought that, if even
after seeing Vishnu’s gesture they showed their disrespect to them,
it must be due to the characteristics they inherited from their
grandfather, Daksha.

The personification of this mighty mountain range is King
Himavan whose personality exudes delightfulness and nobility and
virtue and piety. He is born of a fragment of Lord Vishnu’s energy.

PUNISHMENT

For the perpetuation of his race, Himavan decided upon taking
a wife. Without explicity expressing his wish, he approached the
demi-gods and the sages around him, and asked them if there was
anything he could do for them. Realising his inward idea, the sages
and the demi-gods went up to the ‘Forfathers’ and spoke to them:
“For the edification and well-being of yours and ours, we have up
our minds to get king Himavan married. So we request you to offer
in marriage the hand of your daughter. Menaka”.
The ‘Forefathers’ gladly acceded to the request.
Now, Daksha had daughter, named Svadha, who was married
to the ‘Forefathers (Pitri-Devas)’. The offspring of that marriage
were three beautiful girls Menaka, Dhanya and Kalavati. They
became life nuns (Yoginis), and travelling all over the universe they
once stopped at Vaikuntha, where they paid their respects to Lord
Vishnu and took their seats awaiting the Lord’s pleasure.
At that juncture the sages, Sanaka, Sanandana and others also
visited Vaikuntha. As they were approaching, Vishnu and his consort
Laksmi went forward to greet them. After the sages bowed to
Vishnu, the Lord said: “Revered sages, your arrival here brings us
great pleasure. Vaikuntha is sanctified by your presence. Please be
seated”.

INDIFFERENCE
After seating themselves, Sanaka and other sages cast their
glances at the daughters of Svadha. The girls had not risen from

The offended sages addressed the daughters of Svadha thus:
“You girls, don’t you know that it is proper for the younger people
to show due respect to their elders and receive their blessings?
Should you not have at least followed the example of Lord Vishnu?
Perhaps you think too much of yourselves because you are the
granddaughters of Daksha. We have no choice but to curse you to
go down to the earth immediately from this heavenly Vaikuntha”.
Svadha’s daughters realised their folly and begged the
forgiveness of the sages.
Like all noble souls, the sages remain angry for no more than a
second. They said: “Dear Yoginis, the imprecation of the sages
cannot be undone. However, those people who realise their folly
and seek forgiveness must be pardoned. So, although you cannot
escape from going down to the earth, we grant that you three beget
daughters worthy of the respect of the entire world, Menaka, you
will be married to Himavaan and beget Parvati, who will be Lord
Siva’s spouse. Dhanya, you will marry king Janaka and be the
mother of Sita Devi, who will wed Lord Rama. You Kalavati, you
will wed Vrishabhanu and beget Radha, who will be the beloved of
Lord Krishna”.
The girls were much pleased with the words of the sages:
eventually they gave birth to a daughter each Parvati, Sita and Radha,
who would later live in happiness on Mount Kailasa, in Vaikuntha
and in the Go-loka, respectively.
Siva and Vishnu would have new spouses, unasked for.

66

67

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Hearing the words of the sages, Vishnu kept mum. Maybe he
feared Lakshmi would be wild with him if he expressed his joy at
getting a new wife! The sages took their leave of Lord Vishnu.

you are. I will protect you to the best of my ability. In fact, I have no
other wish than that you should be my daughter. Ah, are you laughing
at me, because you cannot believe that a virgin like me can give
birth to a daughter? Please rest assured that the sages have foretold
my marriage to Himavan. By the grace of Mother Sakti I am going
to give birth to you, and after bringing you up tenderly will get you
married to Lord Siva. In accordance with the prophecy of the sages,
Himavan had agreed to me”.

Accompanied by the demi-gods and some sages, Vishnu went
down to meet Himavan. Delighted at the visit of the noble
personages, the mountain-lord went forward to receive with all royal
honours, and asked them to order him to do whatever they wanted
from him.

WISE COUNSEL
Lord Vishnu spoke to Himavan: “We thank you for your
welcome and your hospitality. Daksha’s daughter, Sati, who married
Lord Siva, has immolated herself. Unable to bear the pangs of
separation from her, Lord Siva is performing rigorous penance. The
Yogic and other holy men are worshipping Him at the same time, it
order to see that Sati Devi would be reborn as His wife. Now, the
grand daughter of Daksha, Menaka, is as wise as she is lovely, and
will be your worthy lifemate in every way. Already the curse of the
sages had determined the course of her life which is that she should
be your wife. Parvati will be the child of your marriage to Menaka,
and when your daughter (Parvathi) marries Lord Siva, Kumara
Svami, the saviour of the demi-gods from the attacks of the demon,
Taraka will be born. So please be ready to accept the hand of
Menaka in marriage”.
Himavan fell in with the wishes of the wise men. Menaka, when
she learnt about Himavan’s acceptance, was immensely gratified.

DREAM
On the same night Menaka appeared in a dream to Sati Devi.
Menaka seemed to speak to the sad Sati Devi: “Child! what made
you look so sorrowful? Your hair is tousled; tears are streaming
down your cheeks. You look so emaciated. Oh, do come to me.
Let me attend to your toilet and make you look the real beauty that

The words of Menaka brought forth tears of ecstasy from Sati’s
eyes. She replied: “Mother, your kind words have relieved me of
the anguish I have been suffering from, because of my father’s
misdeeds. Now I can very well believe that the effulgent energy that
is pervading the Himalayas will soon take the shape of your
offspring”.

MENAKA’S WEDDING
The wedding of Menaka and Himavan was performed with
appopriate splendour. Brahma, Vishnu and the great sages attended
the function and blessed the young couple. Himavan entertained
and rewarded each guest according to his station.
Receiving the blessings of the sages and other guests, Himavan
and Menaka spent their wedded life happily for some time.
The demi-gods advised them to pray to Mother Kalika, in
order to obtain children.
On the banks of Ganga, Menaka prepared an idol of ‘Mahaa
Gauri’ (the supracosmic form of Parvati). On every third and eighth
day of the fortnight the couple used to pray, and offer oblations, to
it after fasting the previous day. On other days, too, Menaka and
Himavan led an austere way of life, with different vows and rituals.
All through, their prayers were punctuated with the obeisance to
the blessed couple, Siva and Parvati “Namo-namah SankaraParvatibhyam”.

68

69

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

On a festival day, during an auspicious period, Menaka thus
worshipped the Para Sakti (the personfication of the supracosmic
energy the feminine counterpart of the creative power of God): “O
Mother of Mothers, you are the supreme source of creation, the
latent energy of all worldly manifestation, the saviour of your devotees
and the queller of their sorrows, and the repository of Yogic powers.
May I beseech you to grant me my humble wishes”.

angels and archangels in heaven dropped flowers from the sky on
to the Himalayas.

Pleased with this prayer, the Divine Mother of Mothers asked
Menaka to speak out her wishes.

At that very moment the Para Sakti turned Herself into the
little daughter of Menaka and started crying like any other newborn.
As the child’s resplendence was brightening the entire surroundings,
Menaka felt before her the presence of the infant with four arms
and the third eye in the forehead. Her whole being was enraptured,
and she started praying to the Mother of Mothers inwardly, closing
her eyes.

Extremely gratified, Menaka said: “Mother, I salute you with
deep gratitude. Besides granting me a hundred heroic and scholarly
sons, may you be my daughter who will marry Lord Siva and give
birth to a son who will punish the wicked demons and protect the
good people”.
‘So be it’ said the Para Sakti.
Menaka mothered Mainaka and another ninety-nine sons, and
was awaiting the birth of the Mother of Mothers, Parvati.
Eventually the effulgent energy which emarated the selfimmolating Sati entered the womb of Menaka. Himavan was pleased
to see that the prophecy of the sages was coming true. The new of
Menaka’s pregnancy was greeted with joyous celebration all over
the mountain kingdom.
As the tenth month of her pregnancy dawned, Menaka was
prayerfully chanting the name of the Para Sakti. Himavan surrendered
himself to the will of God.
It was the ninth day of the bright fortnight of the month of
Chaitra (March-April). The star, Mrigasirsha, was in the ascendant
at midnight. The moon was shining delectably. The gentle Malaya
breezes were blowing refreshingly. The flower garden was giving
out sweet perfumes. The flames from the sacrificial fires were rising
scintillatingly. As the Para Sakti was about to incarnate Herself, the

At last Para Sakti manifested Herself. Menaka was confused.
The mighty Sakti reassured her: “Mother, you need not be afraid.
Soon I will be born to you and then become the consort of Lord
Siva for the benefit of the virtuous and for the detriment of the
Vicious”.

As Menaka opened her eyes, she could see the little child.
Looking at her mother, the child smiled meaningfully. Menaka
caressed the child fondly and gratefully.
Accompanied by his priest, Himavan visited the mother and
the child, and mentally sang the praises of the Mother of Mothers.
The omniscient Siva realised that His future spouse was born
as the daughter of the king of Himalaya, and began to perform His
cosmic dance with great rejoicing. The moon and Siva exchanged
mutually understanding glances. The silver mountain, Kailasa, felt
sanctified, and was glad that at last Siva’s lonesomeness was going
to end.

CHRISTENING CEREMONY
In celebration of Parvati’s birth, the Vedic scholars recited the
relevant sacred hymns from the four Vedas. The king comissioned
his priest to perform the ‘Agnishtoma’ sacrifice in honour of the
Fire-God. All the gods and demi-gods were invited for the christening
ceremony of Parvati. As all the assembled people were fondly staring
at her little child, Menaka was concerned about ‘Drishti Dosha’

70

71

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

(evil effect of being stared at by strangers). But, of course, it was
only a natural motherly concern, and nothing untoward would happen
to that divine child.

Parvati was initiated in various studies. Actually, the goddess
of Education, Sarasvati, was dancing on her tongue. Effortlessly
could she recite the scriptures and all the hymns to Lord Siva. The
musk deer offer their obeisance to Parvati and shed their musk
ceaselessly for her delectation. The goddesses of the forest prostrate
themselves before her and surrender their fruits and flowers for her.
The fairies and nymphs visit her, adorning her with sweet-smelling
garlands. The cuckoos sing joyously, suggesting in their tender notes
that there is none to equal Parvati in all the three worlds, in any
respect.

In the meantime the aerial voice was heard: “O mountain king,
you are so fortunate as to be the father of the Prima (Energy, the
Mother of mothers, You will therefore have the additional privilege
of naming her after yourself, ‘Parvati’, the daughter of ‘Parvata’
(mountain). She will be the consort of Lord Siva. And your kingdom
will be a place of pilgrimage”.
Hearing those nectar-like words Himavan was filled with
gratitude and gratification, and did as advised by the aerial voice.
Without realising the true origin of Parvati, some of the guests offered
the child their blessings as though to an ordinary infant. (Everyone
was treated with equal hospitality, and all the guests returned home
after taking part in the royal christening ceremony.

PARVATI’S CHILDHOOD
Parvati was growing with regular physical and mental power.
She was in the habit of taking the lions by their necks and enjoying
a joy-ride on their back amid the surrounding jungles. She would
take into her arms, and caress, the baby elephants. Calling herself
the mother of the animal cubs she would feed them sumptuously, in
the company of her playmates.
At times Parvati realises her motherhood of the universe and
would accordingly attend to all the needs of the little animals around
her. Calling herself the ‘Kama-Dhenu’ (the wish-fulfilling divine cow)
she would cater for all the needs of her friends. When she plays
ball, she would claim that she can swing around the three worlds, as
though they were mere balls in her hands. Sometimes she actually
claims to be the ‘Para Sakti’, and making up toys would call them
after the Trinity who obey her orders. Her playmates who do not
have an inkling of her divinity would laugh at her, and she would be
cross with them.

Parvati would not respond to anyone’s call, unless it is
accompanied by the articulation of “Siva!”. She would not wear
any other hair-ornament than that of the likeness of the bright crescent.
She would not decorate her forehead with anything else than the
sacred ash. She would not sing any song other than the hymns from
the Sama Veda, the musical scripture. She would not wield any
weapon other than t he t hree-pronged spear and t he
‘chandrahaasa’ sword.
To the extreme delight of her mother she would cry out like a
lute making its sweetest sound. She would astonish even the
Vidyadhara dancing with her own sparking choreography. She would
shame the greatest painter with her skill in drawing the likeness of
Lord Siva. Her tutors would be amazed at the poetic felicity she
displays in her muse-creation.

NARADA’S VISIT
Understanding that Parvati was none other than the Para Sakti,
the wandering sage, Narada, prayed to her. She appeared before
him. The sage was pleasantly struck by the radiant beauty and
splendour of her appearance. As he began to wonder who could
be her fitting spouse, he could see Lord Siva before his mind’s eye.
Thereupon Narada bowed to the lotus-feet of the divine couple’s
vision.

72

73

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Narada decided upon being the instrument of bringing together
Siva and Parvati, and in pursuance of that plan went down to meet
Himavan. Reaching the Himalayas, he feasted his eyes on the sight
of young Parvati playing with her mates. Approaching her he said:
“Mother, I am agog to see you married. Do you imagine that I have
no idea of whom you chose to be your life-partner in your mind? I
am prepared to go to that Lord to Kailasa. Please grant that I be
your humble emissary”.

Himavan said: “I heard that Siva has been performing a solitary,
austere penance, like an anchorite, in a distant forest, ever since the
self-immolation of Sati Devi. How can I hope that Parvati will accept
the hand of such a hermit? On the other hand, if she is willing, and if
Siva is unwilling how can I console my daughter?”.

Parvati replied: “Dear sage, you are known to be fond of
creating dissensions among people. I know of several instance of
people who put themselves to serious trouble, by paying heed to
your mischievous counsels. Of course, I know that in my case you
have no such naughty motive. So I happily bless that you be the
instrument of bringing me and Lord Siva together”.
Narada said: “Mother, I thank you for your trust in me, I know
that I am no more than a negligible instrument in the hands of a
mighty destiny. As for your other words, may I submit that I have
no real wish to cause trouble to anybody? I mean well but it is the
fate of the individuals concerned that sometimes makes my plans
for them go awry. It is a pity that people do not realise that the
workings of Fate are inscrutable and inviolable. Anyway, I am glad
that at least some sensible men know that I am not really to blame
for whatever happens to anyone.
As Parvati and her friends went inside the palace, Narada went
into the court of the mountain king. Himavan and Menaka received
him with due honours. Narada told them: “Blessed couple,
worshipping Lord Siva, your beloved daughter will win the favour
of receiving His hand in marriage. Since Kubera ever remains at the
beck and call of Lord Siva, and the Lord is the personification of
grace, the divine couple will never lack anything. So please encourage
your daughter, and do your best to bring about this happy union of
Siva and Parvati”.

Narada understood the genuine concern of a father. He said:
“Sir, you seem to be unaware of the fact that Parvati is the incarnation
of Sati Devi. It is indeed to be reunited with her, in the form of
Parvati, that Siva is doing His penance”. Parvati, who entered the
court during this conversation, bent her head bashfully, when she
heard these words. Himavan understood the meaning of her gesture.
He expressed his consent to the Siva-Parvati marriage. Delighted,
Narada went home along the celestial path, with a devotional song
dedicated to Lord Siva on his lips.

MENTAL UNREST
Adorning herself with all her ornaments, Parvati stood before
a looking-glass. She then found Siva in the mirror. She could not
make out how to greet the Lord. She ordered her friends to bring
the various materials used in the sacramental worship of Lord Siva.
As soon as they brought the things, the Lord vanished. Crestfallen,
the princess fell to the ground, unconscious. Her friends realised
that it was all the result of her mental anxiety. As she came to, Parvati
was heard speaking: “Lord, what harm have I done you? Narada
and others told me that you were the Lord of mercy and compassion.
Is it fair on your part to disappear just when I wanted to worship
you fondly?”.
Again Siva seemed to stand before her, and she heard him
speak thus: “Parvati, how can you fall in love with me? I am a poor
man, whereas you are the daughter of a rich king. I wander about
with a begging bowl and sleep on bare ground in the cemeteries,
and you are used to a life of luxury and comfort in a palace. Forget
all about marrying a mendicant like me and seek someone who is
more suitable to your royal station in life”.

74

75

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Parvati: “Sir, what did you say? Have you come to make fun
of me or to test my loyalty? I surrendered myself to you long, long
ago. There is no going back on my word, no matter what your are
and no matter what happens”.

bliss. Rest assured that you became perfectly worthy of the Lord’s
grace. You proved yourself to be capable of alluring even a recluse
like Siva. Your life is blessed, and the Lord is yours”.

The tender-hearted Siva regretted His words and smiled
graciously. Immediately Parvati asked her friends to bring some
milk to be consecrated to her Lord.
Again her Lord disappeared, and all that she could see was
her mates beside her. Sorely disappointed, she inquired of them as
to where her Lord had gone. But they said they saw none.
Parvati realised that it was all a dream. When her maids assured
her that her dream would come true, she rewarded them suitably.
Meanwhile Menaka came there to visit her daughter. She told
Parvati: “Darling child, do not doubt Narada’s words. But keep
praying to Lord Siva and He will be eventually yours, as He is
partial to all those who seek His refuge”.
Thankfully embracing her mother for her wise advice and
encouragement, Parvati went to her prayer-room, accompanied by
her maids.

PRAYER-ROOM
There stands the resplendent image of Lord Siva with His
matted locks the deer-skin covering His torse, the drum in one hand
and the three-pronged spear (Trisula) in the other. As Parvati offered
incense to the Lord, His snake ornaments did not come in her way.
And Lord Siva seemed to accept all the consecrated offerings of
food and drink with a smiling grace. Parvati felt doubly reassured
about the fulfilment of her life’s most ardent wish to be united with
Siva. As she, at that juncture, heard the soft singing of the Garuda
bird, which is an auspicious omen, she pressed her Lord’s feet against
her eyes, as a sign of reverential gratification.
The Lord’s lotus-feet appeared to tell Parvati: “Princess, indeed
you are a clever one. Your tender touch is a veritable source of

As the day was dying out, her mother urged Parvati to get
done with her prayers. Taking a flower at the Lord’s feet with which
to decorate her hair, eating a portion of the consecrated food, and
drinking a bit of the sacramental milk, Parvati retired to her room.

SIVA’S PENANCE
Dejected at the separation from Sati Devi, Siva was proceeding to
the forest to perform penance in isolation. On his way he ran into Vishnu.
As Vishnu saw Siva’s whole mien denoting desolation and
distress, the former advised the latter to chant the mantra of
‘Narayana’ during his penance. Siva accepted the advice and started
his penance, seated in the heroic posture of “Virasana”.
As a result of the body-heat generated by the rigorous penance,
a drop of sweat fell on to the ground from Lord Siva’s physical
frame. From the bit of perspiration arose a gigantic figure, having
the colour of blood and large eyes. Siva named him ‘Bhauma’.
When he grew up, Bhauma went to Varanasi and performed a
penance, dedicated to Lord Siva. Pleased with his penance, Lord
Siva granted that he become one of the nine planets the Lord of the
‘Kuja Mandala’. Bhauma thereafter acquired the synonyms, Kuja
and Angaraka. Indeed, Angaraka became a gold-mine to those who
are earnestly devoted to him.
Siva continued his penance. At one point he felt the presence
of Parvati before him. He was very much impressed by her divinely
enchanting good looks. He also realised that she would put herself
to any trouble, sacrifice her own life, for His sake. He thought it
would be unfair to neglect her much longer. Indeed, He was
completely in love with Parvati.

76

77

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

BIRTH OF GANGA

Siva told Himavan, “ O mountain-king, I am pleased with your
words. Just see that I am not disturbed. That is all I want from you.
You may now go back to your palace”.

Ah, who is this Ganga Devi?
Once there was hardly any water on earth for the purpose of
offering oblations to the deceased forefathers and ancestors of
mankind. Then the sages prayed to Brahma. He let a drop of water
drop from his sacred bowl (Kamandalu). That drop of water swelled
into a ferocious stream, causing frightening sounds. The whole earth
trembled at the force of that stream’s flow. Mother Earth feared
that it was a demoniac stream which came to drown her into
nothingness. So she prayed to Lord Siva, who readily obliged her
by sucking up the whole river on to his tresses. However, Lord
Siva left a portion of the Ganga’s water on earth, which formed
itself into Lake Manasasarovar.
Ganga felt sanctified at Siva’s gesture. The entire earth, with
its population, felt much relieved and happy.
Learning about Siva’s penance in the neighbourhood, Himavan
and Menaka went to pay their respects to him. Seeing him engrossed
in rigorous meditaion the couple wondered what was the aim of this
austere vow. After all, they thought, a man of renunciation like Siva
had nothing to seek in the world for Him to perform a rewardseeking penance.
Anyway, they bowed to His feet, and offered Him the
customary fruits and flowers as a form of devotional service. After
which, they addressed Him thus: “O Lord, Thou art omniscient and
all-merciful. Thou art the person who should be prayed to and who
protected everyone. Then why should Thou pray for something or
perform penance? What made Thee leave Thy comfortable abode
of Kailasa and expose Thyself to the elements in this snowy region?
Thou who art not accessible to even the gods in heaven, hast come
to us as a neighbour. We are indeed blessed by Thy presence in our
vicinity. We are like Thy servants. Order us whatever Thou wantest
us to do”.

Who can indeed gauge the depths of Siva’s mind? After all,
could not He have guessed at the real intention of the visit of Menaka
and Himavan? Was it possible that He was putting them off simply
to test their good faith? Would Narada’s words be proved to be
false? Was it not to enable Himself to receive the beloved services
of Parvati that Siva came to do penance in the Himalayan kingdom?
Himavan was at a loss to understand what sort of words he
should next speak. When the couple were still hesitating to leave
the presence of Siva, the Lord asked them: “Why are you still
lingering? Please don’t worry. Your hopes will soon be realised”.

APPEAL
Encouraged, Himavan said: “Lord, our daughter is none other
than the incarnation of Para Sakti. She ever thinks of Thee and says
will marry none else but Thee. She will not come in the way of Thy
penance. All that we request Thee is to permit her to attend to Thy
needs. If Thou dost not agree to this humble request, how can we
console our daughter who is so determined to serve Thee in every
way she can?”.
Siva said: “Sir, what madness is this? How can a hermit like
me permit a young unmarried woman to serve me? Would not a
young lady’s company affect the mind of even someone who
controlled his senses? My wants are simple, and I do not need
anybody’s help to meet them. You say your daughter loves me with
all her heart. Then, don’t you think that her propinquity would disturb
the pursuit of my penance? Anyway, why should a princess like
Parvati be enamoured of a hermit like me? Why don’t you find a
suitable prince for her husband?”.
Himavan replied: “Lord, we ordinary folks cannot delve into
the mystery of Thine actions. We cannot influence the mind of

78

79

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Parvati. She says she was born to be Thy lifemate, and we cannot
change her conviction. If Thou wantest to test us further, let Parvati
herself be the target of Thine examination. Neither woman nor gold
can really affect Thee, who art above them in Thy true essence”.

of Lord Siva. She was inexpressibly enraptured. She chanted a hymn
with the refrain ‘Namah Sivaaya’ to the benign Lord Siva who is the
Destroyer of the vicious circle of birth-life-death, the Embodiment of
pure Energy, the Fulfiller of the devotee’s worthy wishes and the
Indwelling Spirit of her entire being.

Siva could not in all conscience refuse Himavan’s request. He
agreed to be attended on by Parvati.
Himavan and Menaka rushed back to convey the good
tidings to their daughter. As they approached her room, they
found her in deep meditation on Siva. She did not notice their
approach. They waited till she opened her eyes, when Menaka
told her: “Darling, Siva has consented to being served by you”.
Parvati heard the glad news with rapturous relief. Wordlessly
she fell into her mother’s arms, as ecstatic tears streamed down
her eyes, and the drops of ardour-generated perspiration fell
the good news, Parvati’s friends reacted according to their
lights.
PRIYAMVADA (friendly maid): Lord Siva has accepted
Parvati’s services. I will be receiving a nice present if they get
together.
KALAHABHASHINI (quarrelsome maid): If not, there will
be a great fight.
P.: You cannot bring about such an eventually.
K.: Yes, I can.
P.: Oh, please don’t!
K.: Well, let’s see.
With the permission of her parents, Parvati went along with her
maids to the pleasure garden for a leisurely stroll. The parrots, cuckoos
and other singing birds were making delightful music. The peacocks
were dancing in full glee. The forest flowers were exuding sweet
perfumes. Parvati’s left eye throbbed, as a sign of forthcoming good
luck. She felt that the entire world of creation down from the Lord
Creator to the tiny insect was permeated with the pure consciousness

Hearing her prayer, the gods in heaven dropped flowers of
benediction on her.
As it was getting dark, her maids persuaded Parvati to return
home. Before retiring to bed, She performed another ‘Puja’
(sacramental worship) to Lord Siva. As she was fasting for the night,
her maids pressed her to drink some milk, which they brought to
her in a golden cup. In that golden cup of mild Parvati saw a vision
of Siva, who seemed to urge her to drink the milk without further
ado. Gladly Parvati sipped the milk.
When she went to bed she found herself unable to sleep. The
moon through the window appeared to be laughing at her
restlessness and overwhelming love for Siva. She was suffused with
bashfulness. Parvati spent the whole night with sweet thoughts.

SIVA’S MANIFESTATION
Next morning Himavan and Menaka went along with their
daughter to meet Lord Siva. Parvati did not feel the strain of the
journey, as she was too happy at the thought of her dream coming
true to be bothered about physical discomfort.
As Lord Siva opened His eyes, hearing the sound of
approaching footsteps, His glance fell no the white-clad figure of
Parvati, who was radiating immaculate loveliness and who was about
to worship Him with supreme devotion. Struck with the splendour
of her innocent mien, matchless beauty and perfect symmetry of
form, Siva, with eyes half closed, began to think: “Indeed this
indescribable beauty of Parvati can be nothing but the affect of the
incarnation of the ‘Para Sakti’ ”.

80

81

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Then, praying to Lord Siva as the all-merciful Lord of Grace,
Himavan spoke to Him: “Lord, this is my daughter who has come
to serve Thee. Please accept her services and thereby shower Thy
grace on all of us”.

say smilingly: “Parvati, you are indeed a fortunate woman. You
managed to receive the grace of the Lord. Soon you wishes will be
completely fulfilled”.

Siva once again wanted to test Himavan: “Don’t you know
that the company of women leads astray even the greatest of sages?
What point is there in offering the services of a delicately nurtured
princess to a mendicant monk like me?”.
Neither Priyamvada nor Kalahabhaashini liked Siva’s reply.
Parvati, for her part, was anxious to teach Siva a lesson as part of a
well-meaning “tit-for-tat” for his repeated ‘tests’. Priyamvada was
uneasy about future developments. Kalahabhaashini was wise to
Siva’s ‘tricks’. She told Parvati, “ Friend, the Lord of Kailasa is a
clever god. You know He is again and again trying to test you. You
must pay Him back in his own coin!”. Parvati nodded. On the other
hand, Priyamvada spoke to Parvati thus: “Don’t doubt Lord Siva.
He is yours, without doubt. Only, He is playing His part of
Impresario of World-play. Your only answer to His ‘examination’
is to take to the way of Devotion”.
Priyamvada’s words pleased Parvati. She told Siva: “Lord,
dost Thou mean to say that the services of women hamper the
penance of the sages? Dost Thou seriously believe that the minds of
the hermits are so unstable? For my part I will stick to my vow of
celibacy and austerily and will in no way come in the way of Thy
rigorous penance. So kindly accept my humble services in pursuing
Thy penance”.

SIVA’S GRACE
Siva was impressed. He granted Parvati’s wish. His love for
her was fast growing.
As the tears of ecstasy rolled down her cheeks, Parvati fell
prostrated at the feet of Lord Siva. The Lord’s lotusfeet seemed to

Similarly her maids complimented on her sincere tenacity which
enabled her to obtain Siva’s favour.
Parvati, along with the others, returned home for the day.

PANGS OF SEPARATION
Again Parvati spent a restless night. All the efforts of her
maids to soothe her were unavailing. She found life unbearable,
away from Siva. But the time was not right for her to go and
serve her Lord. If indeed she ventured to approach Him at that
hour, she wondered whether Siva would refrain from cursing her.
Rising from her bed, she went up to the terrace of her
palace, along with Priyamvada. The moon was shining in full
splendour. The ‘Malaya breeze’ was blowing softly. The
perfumes from the garden below were soothing and sweet. The
love-cries of the parrot pairs were maddening to the ears of
the lovelorn Parvati. She then glanced down at the Bilva trees,
which are the special favourites of Lord Siva.
Priyamvada spoke to Parvati: “Princess, it is now well past
midnight. Soon it will be dawn. Unless you sleep for a while
you will not be fit enough to attend to the needs of your Lord
tomorrow”.
Then Parvati replied: “Friend, I don’t know but try as I would,
I am unable to sleep. It would seem that my Lord has stolen my
sleeping ability, too, along with my heart! Even though I am here
physically, my mind is with my Lord. I am sorry that you are also
robbed of your sleep on my account. Please rest for a while”.
Priyamvada was much moved. She could not entertain the
thought of resting while her friend was so restless. So she began
singing the songs in praise of Lord Siva, which are so dear to Parvati.

82

Siva Puranam

The songs proved to be soothing lullabies, and Parvati dozed off.
Priyamvada was much relieved in mind.
The next day dawned. Parvati proceeded to the bathroom,
accompanied by Priyamvada. Kalahabhaashini joined them on the
way. Applying oil to Parvati’s hair, she asked: “Princess, why is it
your head is so warm? Couldn’t you sleep last night? Were you
thinking of Siva all the time?”. Parvati “Does your silence mean that
you halfagreed with my surmise”. This time Parvati was angered.
Priyamvada whispered something in Kalahabhashini’s ear. The latter
stopped her ailing and started smearing Parvati’s body with perfumed
paste. Priyamvada sprinkled perfumed water over the paste, the
while humming songs in praise of Lord Siva. Parvati regained her
composure, and after completing her toilet and ornamentation,
proceeded to the spot where Siva was doing penance.

SERVING THE LORD
Even as Siva was wondering why Parvati had not yet turned
up, she fell prostrate as His feet, with reverential love. Siva was
much delighted. The princess washed the Lord’s feet with
consecrated water, and sprinkled her head with the water that
dropped from the deity’s feet. She dried the Lord’s feet with a pure
white piece of cloth, and smeared them with sandalwood paste
mixed with musk. Them she worshipped the feet with flowers much
fancied by Siva and sang in a higher octave this paean:
Sarva-beeja-rakshanaika-seeline NAMAH SIVAAYA
Paarvatee-priyaaya Bhakta-paaline NAMAH SIVAAYA
Durvidagdha-daitya-sainya-daarine NAMAH SIVAAYA
Sarvareesa-dhaarine Kapaaline NAMAH SIVAAYA
(Salutations to Lord Siva, the dedicated Protector of all
humanity, the lover of Parvati, the saviour of the devotees, the
destroyer of the demons, the wearer of the crescent in the hair, and
the holder of the skull-bowl!)
Seeing her Lord perfectly pleased, Parvati took leave of him
with immense satisfaction.

Siva Puranam

83

Siva again fell in deep meditation.
The maids who were staying behind the bushes, joined Parvati.
Priyamvada realised that the Lord was of a gentle, merciful nature.
But true to her nature, Kalahabhaashini felt Siva knew only how to
get Himself served by others, without serving them at the same time.
The wild ornaments and the ashes which decorate Siva’s body
appeared to be repellant to her, and she thought He was hardhearted. Besides, she wondered whether the personified Ganga river
in Siva’s tresses might not prove to be a ‘thorn in the flesh’ to Parvati.
And yet she knew she could not make Parvati change her mind. So
she kept quiet.
All that Parvati wanted was to please her Lord. In the process
she could not help exciting His senses by tickling His feet and by
her enchanting singing. She made the place surrouning the hermitage
look spick and span with her cleaning and decorations. Later she
would stand in respectful attention, feasting her eyes on the divine
figure and awaiting the least little sign of implicit need, or of explicit
command, from Him.
Siva, on his side, would at times steal a loving glance at His
beloved, with His eyes half-closed. Deeply stirred by her tender
attention, He would be tempted to reveal His own irresistible love
for her; yet He would not commit Himself in haste. Looking at her,
He would often be put in mind of Sati Devi, and then His eyes
would be wet with unshed tears.’
O! how ineffably exemplary is this mutual understanding
between the divine couple, which transcends immediate physical
relationship at the same time!

DITI
From among the progeny of Daksha, Kasyapa married
thirteen daughters, of whom Diti is the eldest. Diti had two wicked
sons Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakasipu. There was no limit to the

84

85

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

harm they did to their fellow-beings. Their evil deeds came to an
end, only when Lord Vishnu incarnated himself as the Boar
(Varaaha) and as the Lion-Man (Narasimha) to kill Hiranyaksha
and Hiranyakasipu respectively. Thereby the three worlds were
able to breathe in peace. But the heart of the wicked pair’s mother,
Diti, was broken. She complained to her husband: “Lord, you are
not unware of the maternal grief, resulting from the loss of children:
especially should you know the sacred words, ‘aputrasya gatih
na asti’ (there is no salvation for the man without sons). Our sons
have been killed by Vishnu. Now please find out some means
whereby I can again have children”.

Duly provoked by his mother’s instigation, Vajranga ascended
to heaven and captured Indra, as he was seated on his gem-studded
throne. Diti’s mind was at last at rest.

Kasyapa saw the justice of Diti’s complaint, and also saw to
it that she would again conceive. But Indra subtly entered the
womb of Diti and cut the foetus into pieces. However, Kasyapa
changed those pieces into male children, who were known as
Maruts. The Maruts went to heaven and served Indra.
Naturally, Diti was still disappointed and enraged. She did not
want such children as would serve her foe, Indra. So she requested
her husband for another pregnancy. Kasyapa advised Diti to pray
to Brahma for the fulfilment of her wish.

VAJRANGA
Pleased with Diti’s penance, Brahma granted her wish. Since
the child had a body resembling a diamond (vajra), he was christened
Vajranga.
The gods in heaven were uneasy about the harm that might
befall them at the hands of the powerful Vajranga.
When Vajranga came of age, Diti addressed him: “Son, Indra
is a heartless person. Assuming a false form he made his way into
my womb and cut the embryo into pieces, which thanks to the
reparation done by your father’s saintly powers were born as maruts.
But those children, lost to all sense of proportion, are now serving
their own natural enemy. Indra. Now, don’t you see that you must
wreak vengeance upon Indra?”.

Nevertheless, Vajranga was by nature a good person. He was
contented with whatever he got and was a great devotee of Lord
Siva. Brahma, accompanied by Kasyapa, reasoned with Vajranga.
Reconciling himself to the wrong done to his mother, Vajranga
released Indra magnanimously.
Saying that he had no use for material wealth and comforts,
Vajranga requested Brahma to enlighten him on true knowledge.
After obliging him accordingly, Brahma created for him a suitable
wife, Varangi.
After spending some serenely happy time with Varangi, the
pleased Vajranga asked her to seek from him any favour she wanted.
Varangi asked him to favour her with a son who could defeat Indra.
Realising that this was a test of his honour and integrity (to live up to
his word), Vajranga reluctantly prayed Brahma to fulfil Varangi’s
wish on his behalf ‘So be it’, said Brahma.

TARAKA
In due course Varangi gave birth to a powerful son. At the time of
that child’s birth there were manifestations of forthcoming evil the earth
quaked; on all sides wild fire seemed to be touching the sky; the
whole world was plunged in darkness as thick clouds covered the
sun; the rain fell incessantly; there were tidal waves in the seas; the
hurricane uprooted trees; stars fell on earth; even the sun and the
moon appeared to be losing their brightness; the owls and the jackals
hooted frighteningly; and the cattle ran helter-skelter.
Varangi named her son ‘Taraka’.
Taraka was growing in strength day by day. His body was as
strong as a rough diamond; his mind was filled with evil strategies
and schemes. He was restlessly seeking vengeance on his enemies.
His mother advised him to perform penance and there by obtain

86

87

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

several invincible powers. Accordingly, Taraka went to the Madhu
forest and at a holy spot stood on one leg and prayed to Brahma,
fasting all the time. Flames arose from Taraka’s head, consuming
the plant and animal life all around. The terrified gods ran up to
Brahma for succour. He reassured them safety and came down to
meet Taraka.

Similarly, the frightened Harihaya surrendered his Airavata
tusker; the master of the Kinneras ceded the Nine Treasures; Varuna
gave away the divine horses; the celestial cow, Kamadhenu, handed
over the saint-groups; ‘Dogalavinda’ showered nectar on him;
Mother Earth offered all her produce; the seas gave up their gems
all of which enabled Taraka to rule the three worlds with the needed
power and skill.

BRAHMA’S BOON
Enraptured Taraka bowed to Brahma. Brahma allowed him
to seek any boon of his choice. Taraka said: “Lord, Siva is praying
like an anchorite on mount Himalaya. He is not quite prepared yet
to marry Parvati. So there is no chance of that couple’s coming
together and bringing forth a child. I am not afraid of dying at the
hands of Siva, or His progeny please grant me the boon that I have
the power to conquer all other living creatures and that I could not
be killed by anyone born of woman”.
Taraka returned to his capital, Sonita-pura, where he was given
a royal welcome by his subjects. The teacher of the demons,
Sukracharya blessed him and crowned him as the ruler of the three
worlds.
Siva, in his aspect of Rudra, symbolished the dull mode of
Tamas. Even though he was inwardly regretting the separation from
Sati Devi, he was not yet prepared to leave his life of a hermit.
Taraka knew that whoever disturbed Siva’s penance would be
readily destroyed by that deity. Therefore he was under the
impression that none could conquer him. But Brahma knew in his
heart of hearts that the boon he granted Taraka had an exception,
which is the fruit of Taraka’s own folly.
With a wish to test the powers he obtained from Brahma’s
boon, Taraka set off on a crusade. He vanquished Indra and brought
under his rule the kingdom of the gods and the demi-gods. Even
Kubera, the god of Wealth, was subjugated, and forced to yield all
his treasures to Taraka.

However, the continuous success had warped Taraka’s mental
outlook. He thought nothing of persecuting all the representatives
of virtue, including the harmless sages.
This was the opportunity for which sage Narada was waiting.
The sage is fond of creating trouble and engineering quarrels, but
with an ulterior good aim.
Narada arrived in Sonitapura. Taraka received him with due
honours and inquired of him the state of the three worlds. Narada
replied: “Your Highness, you are the mighty hero who conquered
Indra, the Lord of the divine hosts. Brahma is the deity who granted
you your special powers. Siva is your titular deity. All that you now
need to complete your supreme mastery of the universe is to vanquish
Lord Vishnu”.
Well has it been said, “Vinaasa-Kaale vipareetabuddhih” (one’s
mind is perverted when the time for one’s destruction approaches),
Taraka told Narada: “Sage, you know that the might of my boons is
so invincible that even Vishnu cannot subdue me. So I will challenge
him for a fight. I am sure I will win in such a battle. Please bless me”.
Narada said “so be it!” non-commitally.
The lover of quarrels, Narada, could never keep a secret. He
straightaway went up to Vaikuntha and told Vishnu about Taraka’s
intention and asked the deity to be prepared for the oncoming fight.
The omniscient Vishnu understood the news conveyed by
Narada, with its full significance. Narada took his leave of Vishnu.

88

89

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

As the sound of Taraka’s war-drums was heard, Lakshmi Devi
began to become nervous.

by his own folly. I will tell you how he can be punished. Parvati is now
attending to the needs of Siva during his penance. If you can somehow
see to it that they come together as husband and wife, the eventual
offspring will crush Taraka and bring you solace. For my part I will
advise Taraka to leave heaven and go back to his earthly capital,
Sonitapura”.

Taraka, approaching Vishnu, told the latter with contemptuous
laughter, “Vishnu, I conquered all the three worlds, with the exception
of Vaikuntha. Unless I add your kingdom to my conquests, I cannot
be completely happy. Now tell me whether you are prepared to fight
with me or going to beg my pardon and seek my refuge”.
Enraged at this affront, Vishnu hurled his wheel-weapon at
Taraka. It cut off Taraka’s head, but the next moment the head
regained its position. Lakshmi was astounded. But Brahma’s boon
cannot be proved to be untrue. Vishnu advised Taraka to go back
to Sonitapura, for there was no point in their mutual fight wherein
neither could win.
Taraka saw reason and returned to his realm.
At the same time he saw convinced that he vanquished Vishnu,
because the latter suggested the way of compromise.
All the gods in heaven, including the lords of Air, Rain, Fire,
Death, Medicine, Wealth, and Music were serving Taraka with their
special talents. The divine damsels, Apsaras, were dancing for
Taraka’s delight. Only the sun and the moon were giving warmth
and solace respectively to the gods.
The gods and the sages again went up to Brahma and
complained to him about Taraka’s misdeeds. They impressed on
him the need to curb Taraka, for, otherwise, the noble deeds like
the sacrifical rites could not be performed with success for the benefit
of the entire world.
Brahma told them: “Well, friends, you need not agitate yourselves
too much. Circumstances keep changing. Light and darkness ever
co-exist, but follow each other. Soon you will see the light of good
times. I cannot take back the favours I granted Taraka. The wise men
make good use of the boons, whereas the evil ones, misuse them and
pave the way to their own ultimate downfall. Taraka’s and will come

Indra conferred with the teacher of the gods, Brihaspati, and
informed him of the words of solace spoken by Brahma. Brihaspati
suggested that Manmatha (Cupid) alone could bring about the happy
union of Siva and Parvati.
Accordingly, Indra and Brihaspati sent for Manmatha.
Manmatha’s wife, Rati Devi, had a premonition of disaster. But
Manmatha assured her that he would safely return home, after fulfilling
the commision of the king of gods.
Rati could only pray to God for succour, as her husband left
for heaven to the accompaniment of the music of the loving birdpair (chiluka, goruvanka).

MANMATHA’S MISSION
When Manmatha approached Indra, the latter explained
everything and told him that the time had come for him to rise to the
occasion, as he alone could come to the aid of the suffering gods
and other good people.
But Manmatha protested that he was no match for the wrath
of Lord Siva, and suggested someone mightier than himself for the
mission.
Nevertheless, Indra reminded him that the teacher of the gods
said that only Manmatha could do the needful. Indra assured
Manmatha that in as much as the letter was the son of Vishnu and
Laksmi, he had no need to be afraid of Siva, that it was the duty of
the one who is capable of helping others to do so even risking
personal discomfort, and that the gods would assist him to the best
of their ability.

90

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Unable to refuse such convincing persuasion and reassurance,
Manmatha accepted the mission entrusted to him, albeit with
trepidation and reluctance.

JASMINE’S EMBASSY

Manmatha introspected: “Oh, who can escape the decrees of
Destiny? There is no getting away from the wrath of Siva. Still,
rather than go back upon one’s word one should face even death
cheerfully, So let me leave for the Bilva forest, to divert Siva’s mind
from his austerity”.
Then Manmatha plucked a jasmine and spoke to it: “Dear
jasmine, you know how much I love you. Now, can you tell me if
there is anything or anyone dearer to me than you?”.
The jasmine replied: “Yes, only one your better half, Rati Devi”.
Manmatha said: “You know, jasmine, Rati loves you very much,
because your perfume is the dearest to her. She considers you to
be her finest ornament, and even goes to the extent of saying that
looking at you she feels the same pleasure as she derives from seeing
me. So I shall send you now to my wife to keep her company,
because she cannot tolerate the separation from me even for a
second. She cannot sleep or eat without first seeing me eat and
sleep. She does all the things that are dear to me. She wakes me up
first thing in the morning with her sweet songs; whenever I am absentminded and forget to eat and drink, she herself feeds me and makes
me eat and drink whatever I like best. Now please explain to her
that I may return home safely if I obtain the grace of Siva. This is my
message for her ‘Darling, you know I am entrusted with the task of
arranging Siva’s wedding. I shall come back to you alive, with God’s
blessing; if not, I shall still be alive in my entity of glory and even
then my soul will remain alive to my memory of your love. May
God bless you and keep you!”.
So saying, Manmatha released the arrow which is studded
with the jasmine flower.

91

As Rati was eagerly awaiting her husband’s return, she espied
the jasmine flying along the celestial path. The sight of the flower
gave her new hope, and she was sure that it was carrying news of
her lord. Suddenly the jasmine dropped down on Rati’s shoulder.
The jasmine seems to have lost its freshness and perfume. Rati’s
eyes were filled with tears, seeing the plight of the flower.
Rati seemed to have gathered the message of her husband
from the state of the flower, whose embassy was expressed through
in its silence.
As Rati was wailing that the heartless Indra was responsible
for the self-sacrificing task of Manmatha, her maids consoled her
that, since Parvati is the incarnation of ‘Para Sakti’, no harm would
befall her husband.
Helplessly, Rati placed the jasmine in her hair and was hoping
against for the return of Manmatha.

MANMATHA’S DUTY DONE
As Manmatha arrived in the Bilva garden, he saw Siva engaged
in deep penance. There was no sign of Parvati. Getting behind a
Bilva tree he aimed a flower-arrow at the Lord’s feet. The flower
which fell on target felt that its life was sanctified with the touch of
Siva’s feet.
Still Siva did not move a bit. The flower faded.
However, the garden all around was in full flowering. The
streams were flowing with limpid water. The cuckoos and other
spring birds were singing melodiously. The cows were being
passionately followed by the stud-bulls. The moon was shining in
full splendour. All this was the good effect of Manmatha’s flowerarrow, the harbinger of springtide.
Early next morning Parvati left for the Bilva garden, along with
her maids, to serve the needs of Siva. As she entered the garden,

92

93

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

she felt good omens. She expressed her joy indirectly to her friends:
“It is time to attend to the morning needs of Siva. If we delay, our
hopes may be belied”. To which Kalahabhashini replied: “Well, only
people who entertain hopes are likely to be disappointed. What do
we, who never hope for anything, care about ‘hopes being belied’?”.

Manmatha fell prostrate at Siva’s feet and supplicated: “Lord,
I did what I was ordered to do by my master, the lord of the gods,
Indra, for the benefit of all creation. I admit that I have been
otherwise guilty of misleading many a chaste woman and several
innocuous young men; maybe these flames are the converted tears
of those unfortunates, now about to burn me up. And yet, Lord, my
wife Rati is innocent in every way. I leave it to Thy sense of justice
to protect her”. As he had his say, the flames consumed him and he
turned into ashes. Siva’s heart was hardened. The whole Bilva garden
itself was burnt up. All the lookers-on were wondering what further
disaster, might befall.

Parvati was offended by her maid’s retort. Kalahabhashini
sought her forgiveness.
As Parvati and her mates arrived there, the hermitage looked
like a pleasure park. The warm day appeared to be like the soft
night and to be showering gently rays of moonlight. Parvati felt a
thrill running through her entire being. Reassured that her love would
soon bear fruit, she was eager to serve her Lord.
Manmatha was pleasurably amazed at the sight of Parvati’s
matchess loveliness and grace and poise. He wondered whether
Siva’s adamant silence was but a ruse to test the love of Parvati.
Parvati worshipfully placed a few fragrant flowers near Siva’s
feet. Siva opened his eyes and saw her. Grasping the opprotune
moment, Manmatha aimed at Siva all his five flower-arrows
(Aravinda, Asoka, Chuta, Mallika and Utpala). The blue-lily-hit
made Siva impassioned.
The sidelong loving look of Parvati drove away Siva’s insentient
aspect, and she stole His heart. Siva thought that no other woman
was fit to hold a candle to Parvati. The more He gazed at her the
more He was attracted by her incomparable beauty. His own glance
reciprocated Parvati’s ardent look. Parvati’s friends were gratified.

SIVA’S PENANCE MARRED
Siva was bewildered at the change in His outlook. Seeing that
it was due to the mischief of Manmatha, He opened the third eye on
His forehead. Terrifying flames rose up from the eye and were about
to consume Manmatha.

RATI’S LAMENT
Here Rati felt bad omens. Realising that Siva’s third eye burnt
up her husband, she ran up to Siva and wailed thus: “Lord, you
know my husband is not to blame for what happened. He was
doing the bidding of his master to see that you and Parvati beget the
offspring who alone would be able to kill the demon Taraka. I do
not have to tell you that even death is preferable to widowhood to
a woman. If you do not take pity on me and restore my husband to
me, I may have to turn to Parvati for help. Thereby I may bring
about a rift between you, which I want to avoid if I can. So kindly
grant me my humble and just wish”.
Siva’s originally soft heart was moved. He said: “Rati, it is not
at all my intention to separate husband and wife. But my third eye
opened involuntarily, as a result of the marring of my penance. Your
husband’s death is irrevocable. However, I see the justice of your
complaint. I revive him to the extent that he would be visible to you
alone and that he would be able to discharge his love-inciting duty
invisibly. Go and live happily together with your husband, who will
now regain his life with the just mentioned stipulation”.
Rati and Manmatha bowed to Siva gratefully and took their
leave of him.

94

Siva Puranam
Siva gave up his penance and returned to his Kailasa abode.

Parvati was unable to make out Siva’s actions. She could not
quite see the justice of burning up Manmatha. Nor could she
understand his going back to Kailasa without so much as saying a
word of farewell to her. Disappointed and dejected, she returned
home, along with her maids.
Learning about the happenings from the maids, Parvati’s parents
were much grieved. Seeing his wife and his daughter mope
inconsolably, Himavan told them: “Why do you weep so? All in
good time. Siva must have had some reason behind returning to
Kailasa. There is no way the birth of the child of Siva and Parvati
can be stopped, because Taraka’s end is pre-ordained. Just wait
and you will see that everthing will turn out in our favour”.
Meanwhile sage Narada called on them. Seeing him Parvati’s
hopes were raised. After receiving their words and acts of welcome,
the sage told them: “Siva is always partial to those who depend on
Him. In due course the wedding of Siva and Parvati will take place
with great spledour. A mighty son will be born to them. Who alone
will be able to punish Taraka. The sages and the gods are on your
side. Therefore rest assured that all will end well”.

PARVATI’S PENANCE
Parvati was impressed by Narada’s assurance. However,
not to leave things to chance, she began performing a great
penance in order to obtain the favour of Siva by her own effort.
Narada advised her to perform her penance chanting the fivelettered sacred Mantra, ‘NAMAH SIVAAYA’, which is
preeminently suited to remove all sins and to cause all benefits.
Parvati received the sage’s blessings and her parent’s
permission for her vow. But, true to the feminine instinct, Menaka
tried to dissuade her daughter from undertaking a rigorous task,
just for the purpose of obtaining a recluse-like spouse. She further
told her daughter: “Even if you still want Siva for your husband, you

Siva Puranam

95

can pray to him while comfortably staying in the home. I never heard
about any woman going to the forest to do penance for obtaining a
husband. By offering prayers in their own homes, have not Lakshmi,
Sanjna, Sachi and Rohini respectively won the favours of Vishnu,
Sun, Indra and Moon?”.
When Parvati remained adament, Menaka said: “At least take
your maids with you, if you insist on going to the jungle. May God
bless you”.
Parvati could not sleep a wink that night. Rising from the bed
early next morning she talked to Priyamvada: “Friend, I have to go
the forest, removing all my ornaments, and I have to live there without
food and drink. If you like you and some other maids may
accompany me. I will be completely immersed in praying to Siva
and will not think of anyone or anything else till my prayers are
answered”.
As her mother and her friends failed to persuade her to stay at
home, Parvati set off for the forest, shorn of all her jewellery and
rich raiments, Dressed in a plain fibre cloth like a nun, she walked
towards the forest, accompanied by a few loyal maids. Even the
dumb beasts and birds seemed to shed tears looking at the royal
princess walking like a mendicant towards the forlorn forest. Himavan
and Menaka bade farewill to her, with tears in their eyes.
Parvati and her maids reached the holy spot by name,
“Sringa Teertha”. The forest deities bade her welcome. She felt
signs of forthcoming good, and began her penance with firm
determination and one-pointed devotion. The maids stayed at a
respectable distance, guarding her against any possible untoward
happening.
To control her body and mind with equal self-forgetfulness,
Parvati stood amidst the ‘five fires’ (Panchaagni) during summer;
in unprotected open air during monsoon; on snowy mountain
peaks during winter. She was all the time fasting. Verily she is

96

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

known as ‘Aparna’, because she would not eat even a tender
leaf (parna) during her penance.

EMBASSY

When she saw that her rigorous penance was of no avail,
she plaintively addressed Siva thus: “O Lord Siva, you are
omnipotent and omniscient and omnipresent. You are allmerciful and all-powerful. I care not for my personal comfort.
I shall surmount any obstacle that comes in the way of my
becoming yours. I swear on all that is sacred to me all those
ornaments and paraphernalia of yours that I am as pure as
the driven snow and an immaculate virgin. I surrender myself
entirely to you. Take me my Lord!”.
The naturally tender heart, of Siva melted. But if He accepted
Parvati’s hand, He would again become a householder and has to
give up His celibacy. Thereby His ideal of complete detachment
will fail. On the other hand, He thought further, if He would not
marry Parvati she might even take her own life which would mean
that the entire world would blame that tragic eventuality on Him. It
was as if He was caught between the devil and the deep sea.
The flames arishing from the penance-power of Parvati have
been spreading on all sides. The gods and the sages were frightened
and they ran up to Brahma took them to Vaikuntha, where they
were duly greeted by Lakshmi and Vishnu. Vishnu told Brahma: “I
suggest that you take the hordes of the gods to Kailasa to persuade
Siva, whose obstinacy saw the buring of Manmatha and not led the
flame of Parvati’s penance-power to consume the world around
her”.
But the gods would not dare face Siva. Tremblingly they
appealed to Vishnu: “Lord, we cannot bring ourselves to go into the
penance of Siva, who is enraged on accont of the failure of his
penance. We beseech that you and Brahma represent us in this
connection”.
Agreeing, Vishnu took them along to Kailasa.

97

When Vishnu and party arrived at Kailasa, Nandi conveyed
the news of their arrival to Siva. Siva received them with due honours
and asked them the purpose of their visit.
Brahma and Vishnu requested Siva to marry Parvati rightaway,
because only an offspring of their wedding would be able to quell
the demoniac Taraka.
Siva said: “I quite understand your position. But you know
what marriage does to a austere way of life. Woman is the source
of all evil. To become a slave to the sexual passion would ruin my
peace of mind and my penance. Of all the worldly bonds, that which
makes man attached to a woman is the strongest and vilest. None
who seeks bliss should fall a prey to the wiles of woman”.
Smilingly Brahma rejoined: “Lord Siva, what you say is true
only of the lesser mortals of the world. Besides, there is none in the
universe who is the equal of a good woman the ornament of the
home, the mother of creation, the noble hostess who has to give the
alms to the wandering monks also. After all, how many times before
have you not broken your vows for the sake of the suffering world?
Have you not saved the entire world from annihilation by drinking
up the poisonous holocaust, Haalaahala? Now is the time for you
to come to the aid of the good people of the world who are being
devoured by the bad people headed by Taraka. You as a noble
deity have the sacred responsibility of saving the suffering world
which looks up to you”.

THE TEST BY THE SEVEN SAGES
Lord Siva commissioned the Seven Sages to go and test the
sincerity of Parvati. Accordingly, they went down to meet her and
spoke to her: “Parvati, Narada is an unreliable schemer. By initiating
the daughters of Daksh in the ways of renunciation he caused a rift
between parent and children. Teaching the ‘Narayana Mantra’ to
the wife of Hiranyakasipu, and thereby making her give birth to the

98

99

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Vishnu-devotees, Prahlada, he made the son eventually bring about
the downfall of the father. Please don’t heed the advice of this
quarrel-monger. You can never hope to divert Siva from his penance.
After all, what sort of happiness do you hope to receive from a
Mendicant like Siva? Go back to your palace and make yourself
comfortable in your natural surroundings”.

You indeed look like one of the Trinity, and this hermitage has
acquired a new grace by your presence. Kindly reveal your identity”.

Smilingly Parvati replied: “Siva, is it fair on the part of such
sages as you to speak such words? Do I not know that Siva is the
Lord of all spiritual splendour, the Master of scriptual wisdom and
the Saviour of the universe? Both His devotees and His foes, Brahma,
Vishnu, Indra, Daksha, Manmatha and a host of others can bear
witness to his unrivalled valour. Besides, if is not to enjoy bodily
joys that I seek the hand of Siva: if he is a monk I will be a nun; if he
is the great destroyer, Mahakala, I will be Kali, and both of us will
simultaneously destroy the evil forces and re-create the world of
virtue and goodwill. No other penance or vow or prayer or worship
is as effective as that directed to Lord Siva. Why should I leave the
all-powerful, all-merciful and all-bountiful Siva and seek some other
lesser pleasures or comforms of transitory existence?”.
Immensely impressed by these words of Parvati, the seven
sages returned to Siva and reported to him about her unrelenting
devotion and dedication and devotion.

TEST BY SIVA
Assured by the sages of Parvati’s sincere love for Him, Siva
wanted to test her Himself finally before He made her His own.
He assumed the guise of an old monk, and, limping with the
aid of a walking stick, he went near her, as she was immersed in
deep meditation. Looking on the evocative effulgence arising from
her he was wonder-struck.
Opening her eyes, Parvati greeted the old mendicant cordially,
offering him holy waters and sweet fruits. After doing the honours,
she said: “Sir, to what do I owe the honour of your gracious visit?

The monk replied: “I am one of the progeny of Brahma and a
wandering monk. Doing penance, I try to benefit the whole world.
But tell me, who you are? You look like one of the consorts of the
Trinity. Why should you undertake such rigorous penance? What is
your purpose? Are you separated from your husband?”.
Parvati said: “Lord, you are omniscient. I have been doing
penance to receive the favours of Siva. But till now He has not
granted me His appearance before me. Just as I was about to
immolate myself by jumping into the fire, you have come here. It is
only to offer you my humble hospitality I had not yet committed
suicide. I have done my duty to you. My sole aim is to be the spouse
of Siva, no matter how many rebirths it takes me to achieve it”.
So saying, she entered the fire. But the fire made itself cool
to her touch. Seeing that miracle, the monk said: “Lady, even the
god of fire is reluctant to be his natural self, So your suicide-attempt
is in vain. Do not lose hope. Why should you wish to turn your
golden being into a useless piece of clod”.
Parvati then made a sign to Priyamvada, who then spoke to
the monk: “Holy father, this is my friend, She is named Parvati,
because she is the daughter of the mountain (Parvata) king, Himavan,
She is also known as Kali. She is truly in love with Lord Siva.
Although she is born a princess, she is prepared to lead the simple
life of the consort of the deity who is the symbol of detachment and
renunciation. She is now performing a hard penance because her
sole aim in life is to be the spouse of Siva. Before she started her
penance she planted some saplings which have now grown into
full-blossomed trees. And yet her prayers do not seem to be
answered by Siva”.
The monk turned towards Parvati and asked whether what
her friend said was true. Parvati answered: “As God is my witness

100

101

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

I surrender myself to Siva; I wish to ‘buy’ his love with my mind,
heart and soul, with the power of my penance; with the sincerity of
my aim in thought, word and deed; and in short, with my entire
conscious being. I do not know whether what I do is right or wrong,
but I do know that I am born only to be the consort of Lord Siva”.

Maaya (Nature) was allowed to be attached to It like the reflection
in a mirror. The Supremed self has nothing to do with the distinctions
of the manifest world like the human of caste and colour and creed.
Effortlessly, like the human breath, the scriptures evolved out of the
Absolute, and they were handed over to Vishnu by God. The task
of creation was entrusted to Brahma. The rulership of heaven was
offered to Indra. The nine treasures were left in the care of Kubera.
The original form of that Absolute resides in Siva, Now, what makes
you think that supreme Siva is a mere mendicant?. Where the eight
Siddhis floursih, there is the abode of Siva. Can you really understand
the supreme nature of Siva, by worshipping whom the lowliest of
the lowly attains his heart’s desire, and the worst of the sprites cannot
harm one? If, as you say, Siva is such a poor person how is it that
He bestows all the riches on those that serve Him? Why is it that the
Vedic scholars universally bend their heads in obedience to Him?
His residence is the silver mountain; His bow is the golden mountain
(mount Meru). Sir, how can a veritable mendicant like you appreciate
the phenomenal mendicant who is otherwise the true lored of all
riches, the real saviour of the universe? Such men as you who abuse
Siva must be taught a severe lesson. If this is not possible, they must
be shunned. Come, Priyamvada, let us leave the presence of this
false accuser of Siva”.

The monk: “Oh, is this all your wish? Well, I am an old man. I
have no business to linger here. I must go on my way”.
As the monk turned his back and was leaving, Parvati
supplicated: “Holy father, what is all this hurry? Have you no word
of encouragement for this hapless woman?”.

ABUSE OF SIVA
The monk stopped and spoke to Parvati: “Princess, why do
you waste your love on the mendicant, Siva, whose mount is a dull
bull, whose retinue is filled with ghosts, whose clothes are made of
animal hide, whose body is smeared with ash and who is detached
from the world? Like you, Sati Devi fell in love with him; her father
fell out with Siva, as a result of which she had to immolate herself in
the sacrificial fire. You are a born princess. You who are bedecked
in priceless jewels, how can you put up with a person whose
ornaments are snakes? If Siva is rich, why should he go about seminaked? If he has a worthy home why should he dwell in burialgrounds? Above all, if he really loved you, why should he turn
Manmatha into ashes? Be advised and turn your attention on someone
else, who is your fit partner”.
Parvati was offended and said: “Sir, I thought you were a kind
soul. But now I see you have come here to disturb me. Stop this
meaningless abuse of the great god, and hear from me the truth
about Siva”.

TRUTH ABOUT THE SIVA-ENTITY
“God the Absolute has no attributes. But, in order to create
the world of beings who were destined to be born, the attribute of

SIVA IS PLEASED
Siva was impressed by the sincerity of Parvati and revealed
Himself before her. “Dear, you have conquered me by your true
penance and by your sincere chanting of my name (“Namah
Sivaya”). I shall reciprocate your love and devotion and affection.
Your pains have been rewarded. There is none in the world who is
your equal. Forget the past of our separation. Now let us be united
in unending love”.
Parvati was elated. She thus addressed the personification of
true love, the fulfiller of her life wish: “Lord, you know that I am the
Sati Devi who is reborn as the daughter of Himavan. Informing my

102

103

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

parents about our mutual love, take me to Kailasa as a true
consecrated offering. We must be wed in accordance with the Vedic
injunctions. It was because Sita and Rama were married, without
the performance of the ‘nine-planet worship’, that they had to go
through trials and tribulations later on”.

As she neared her home, Menaka and Himavan went forward
and greeted her with affection. Learning from her about the success
of her penance, they thanked their lucky stars and were immensely
delighted.

Smiling with contentment, Siva said: “You are the ‘Maaya’
(natural) attribute of the attributeless Absolute which I originally am,
I am the Self of the entire universe. I am the Cosmic Person, and
you are the manifest Nature. In our union, the nine planets and other
manifestations from an integral part. There is no need for us to
worship anything else but to be true to ourselves. You and I represent
the phenomenal aspect of creation and the noumenal source of
creation respectively”.
Parvati, delighted, said: “Lord, your words are perfectly true.
I know you, in your original self, have no need to deal with the
world of duality. But since I am the creative principle, comprising
the three modes of Nature (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), I have to
respect the formalities of the manifest world. So kindly take the
permission of my parents for our marriage. When people learn about
your humility, in taking this step which you can otherwise dispense
with, they will praise you all the more”.
Siva saw the reason of Parvati’s advice.
But before he could fulfil that formality, He had to return to His
abode, Kailasa. The ‘pramatha’ hordes who learnt about the
fulfilment of the love of Parvati were extremely pleased.

PANGS OF SEPARATION
Parvati was happy on hearing Siva’s request to accompany
him to His abode. But she said that she would gladly follow Him
after their formal wedding. Then she completed the formal
performance of her penance and returned to her palace with her
maids.

Later they placed her in a golden chariot and took her to their
palace, where she was given a ceremonial reception with the chanting
of the sacred hymns by the Vedic scholars and with the welcoming
traditional paraphernalia by her mother and other women. Himavan
gave suitable gifts to the Vedic scholars and the lady guests.
Parvati was restless all night. Although Siva invited her to
accompany Him to Kailasa straight away, the formality of the wedding
stood in the way of her complying with His suggestion. She knew
that Siva would never go back on His word, and was joyously
recollecting His assurances concerning the reciprocation of her for
him. At last when she did doze off Siva appeared in a dream and
reassured her about His love for her. When she opened her eyes
she could not see Him. As she uncomfortably tossed in her bed in
dejection, her maids attended on her and encouraged her with the
news of her imminent wedding to Siva.

ALIEN MONK
For his part Siva himself found the time hanging heavily on his
hands at Kailasa. He wanted to see Parvati somehow or other. So
he put on the garb of a wandering monk and went down to the
Himalayas. There he regaled the denizens wit his cosmic dance,
and his musical blowing of the conch.
Learning about that mysterious visitor who was stealing the
hearts of the people at large, Menaka wished to witness his art. As
though in ready answer to her prayers, Siva turned up at the gate of
the palace-gate no sooner than she entertained that wish.
The false monk blew his conch, beat his drum and began to
dance to his own music. Parvati joined her mother. Looking at the
splendid countenance of the visitor and his uncanny skill of singing

104

105

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

and dancing, she realised the monk was none other than her wouldbe spouse in disguise.
The false mendicant also realised that his beloved found him
out, and knowingly smiled in response to her reverential glances at
him.

Siva returned to Kailasa. Once again he reported what
transpired on the Himalayas to the seven sages. He also requested
them to go meet Himavan and make him see reason.

Menaka wanted to reward that mendicant-minstrel with pearls
and diamonds, But Siva refused them and instead said that he
wanted the hand of her daughter. Menaka was enraged at this request
of a person whom she mistood for a mere mendicant. She chided
him: “Fellow, you look like a monk who has renounced the world.
How dare you seek the hand of a princess? Go back on your way,
you old beggar! If you linger here further, I will have you kicked out
by my servants”.
The monk was unmoved by this threat. He resumed his singing
and dancing. Parvati told her mother that the visitor was Siva in
disguise and requested her to persuade Himavan to arrange the
wedding in good time. But Menaka was not yet convinced and
complained to Himavan about the monk’s audacity. Himavan,
angered, instructed his men to send the mendicant away from the
courtyard.
Siva eluded the hands of the king’s men, and put them to great
trouble by playing ‘hide-and-seek’ with them.
Siva then turned himself into Vishnu, his four hands each holding
the conch, the mace, the disc and the bejewelled bow (saaringa).
This was to impress upon the lookers-on the non-duality between
Siva and Vishnu.
Parvati alone understood that gesture and bowed to the monk
respectfully.
At that point Siva assumed in a flash the forms of Vivasvan
and Nataraja successively, and then vanished in thin air.
None could make out the significance of that act, and everybody
was fearing the wrath of Siva.

The seven sages were gratified that they were going to be in
the instruments in the eventual wedding of Siva and Parvati. Indeed,
to be able to see Siva and, more, to help Him, was like the blind
gaining sight, the deaf acquiring hearing and the barren woman
begetting children-they thought.

ANARANYA
On hearing the news of the arrival of the Seven Sages, Himavan
and Menaka received them with appropriate honours.
Vasishtha then told Himavan: “O king, a great devotee of Siva,
Anaranya, was born in the Manu clan. He had five wives, by whom
he had a hundred sons and a daughter. The girl was named Padma.
She was as wise as she was lovely. When she came of age, her
father was on the lookout for a suitable bridegroom.

PIPPALADA
“In the Pushpabhadra river, Padma was playing water games
with her friends. It so happened that the son Dadhichi, sage
Pippalaada, passed that way at that hour. On seeing Padma, he fell
in love with her rightaway. Learning that she was the daughter of
Anaranya, Pippalaada went to meet him and begged him for the
hand of his daughter. He threatened that he would destroy the
Anaranya clan in case his request was not honoured by the latter.
“Anaranya was unhappy at the idea of getting his beautiful young
daughter married to an old sage, and sought the help of Siva to
avoid that eventuality.
“In the meantime another sage came on the scene and advised
Anaranya to accede to ‘Pippalaada’ request. Anaranya agreed to
do so; Padma too accepted the hand of Pippalaada willingly. The
wedding of Padma and Pippalaada was performed in great style.
The bride and groom were living together happily.

106

107

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

DHARMA

husband, whom I now grant youth and longevity. Your husband, in
his regained youth, will please you in every way, for he will now be
as endowed with long life as Markandeya, as rich as Kubera, as
powerfully prosperous as Indra, as wise as Siva and Vishnu who
treat each other as equals, as knowledgeable as sage Kapila, as
pleasing as the full moon, as clever as Angirasa, and as all-knowing
as Brahma’.

“One day when the lovely Padma was bathing in a lake, Dharma
happened to see her and he readily took a fancy to her. He told her:
“O beautiful lady, I am the emperor of this world. I am young and
romantic, whereas your husband is an aged ascetic. You who are
so good-looking that even the damsels of heaven cannot bear
comparison with you must realise that you must not waste the few
young years of your life. I will see that you have most enjoyable
time of your life in my company, and I will make my other queens
subservient to you!.
“The chaste Padma was angry with this prattle of the king and
replied: “You may be an emperor, but you are the worst of sinners
because you who should protect the virtuous and punish the wicked
are yourself trying to commit an adulterous crime. My husband is
respected by the entire world and I love and worship him. If you try
to molest me, you will be the target of the fire of my imprecation,
which cannot be put out, even if the real fire may ever become
cold”.
“Frightened, Dharma said: ‘Mother, actually I am not a king. I
have only come to test your character. Forgive me my folly;
henceforth I shall look upon other women as my mother. I will pray
to Lord Siva for salvation--- that benign deity who is the saviour of
the fallen and the source of the universal energy’.
“Padma was impressed by the sincere contrition of Dharma
and told him: ‘Sir, I mistreated you, because of my characteristic
feminine frailty. I now understood you. May you grow and decrease
in cycles like the moon. You will walk on four legs in the age of
Krita; on three legs in the age of Treta; on two legs in the age of
Dvapara; and on one leg in the age of Kali. Now it is time for me to
go back and serve my husband’.
“Dharma was amazed at her sense of propriety and at her
liberality. He blessed her: ‘May you live in continual bliss with your

“Accordingly, the now youthful Pippalada and Padma spent
many glorious years of felicitous married life and had ten sons”.

WISE COUNSEL
Then Vasishtha spoke to Himavan: “Please make all the
arrangements for the wedding of Siva and Parvati. The auspicious
day is the Monday evening in the month of Margasirsha, when all
the stars and the planets will be in proper conjuction”.
Himavan agreed with the advice of the sage.
Similarly, Menaka also accepted the advice of Arundhati, the
wife of Vasishtha, concerning the wedding and the wedding
arrangments.
Parvati bowed to Arundhati and the seven sages, and received
their blessings.
Himavan told the sages: “Your advice is a command to us,
which we cannot disobey. Henceforth Parvati is the property of
Lord Siva. We will be awaiting Siva’s pleasure. Kindly convey to
Him our regards”.
Vasistha complimented Himavan on his wisdom.
Himavan, Menaka, Parvati and others gave the sages and
Arundhati a fittingly reverential farewel.
Returning to Kailasa, the sages reported to Siva, in glowing
terms, about Himavan’s acceptance of their proposal and about the
hospitality they received on the Himalayas. They also informed Siva

108

109

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

about the fixing of the ‘Muhurta’ (auspicious moment) and about
the ceding of the heart of Parvati, as a prewedding gift to him.

On the eve of his departure for the wedding at Himalaya, Siva
was duly anointed by the chaste ladies. The personified river, Ganga,
embedded in Siva’s locks, appeared to be enraged. Then Lakshmi and
Sarasvati pacified her.

Siva was pleased. When he said that he had no ‘relations’ in
the world, the sages reminded him about the other members of the Trinity
and about the lord of the hosts, Indra, who along with their spouses
would take care of all the wedding arrangements on Siva’s side.

SUBHA LEKHA (WEDDING CARD)
Himavan himself composed the wedding invitation and sent it
to Siva through his son, Mainaka, and his court priest. Before leaving
for Kailasa, Mainaka also took a letter from his sister, Parvati,
addressed to Siva.
Mainaka and the priest arrived on the silver mount. Siva
received them appropriately, when they bowed to his feet.

Here on the Himalayas, the successful return of Mainaka and
the royal priest was greeted with rejoicing and fanfare. Parvati
rewarded her maids with many jewels, on hearing about Siva’s
acceptance of the marriage proposal.

WEDDING PARTY
Siva sent word to Himavan that he was arriving for the wedding,
accompanied, by the other members of the Trinity, the gods and
demi-gods in heaven, and their families.
Himavan went forward and greeted them aptly.

They handed over Himavan’s invitation and Parvati’s letter to
Siva, who received and read them with great delight.

The capital of the Himalayan kingdom, Oshadhiprasthapura,
was filled with the rejoicing and the glorying in the gracing of the
mount with the presence of those supreme celestial denizens.

Siva assured the duo that he would be on mount Himalaya at
the appropriate hour before the auspicious moment fixed for the
wedding.

Lakshmi and Vishnu, Saraswati and Brahma, arrived on their
respective mounts, the Garuda eagle and the royal swan. Preceded
by Nandi, Shiva arrived on his bull mount.

Pleased with the success of their mission, Mainaka and the
priest returned to Himalayas after taking their leave of Lord Siva.

All the heavenly guests were delighted with the respectful
welcome they received from Himavan and his party.

WEDDING ARRANGEMENTS

As the wedding party was entering the Himalayan capital, Siva’s
eyes fell on the shrine wherein the idols of Rama and Seeta were
consecrated. Getting down from his mount, Siva walked up to the
temple and saluted the divine couple, who appeared to be greeting
Siva in their corporeal form. Sita and Rama blessed the bashful
bridegroom. The onlookers were impressed with Siva’s humility
and sense of devotion.

The three heavenly couples whom Siva requested to make the
wedding arrangements arrived on mount Kailasa and gladly accepted
Siva’s orders in that connection.
The divine architect, Visvakarma, built a magnificent edifice
on mount Kailasa, for the residence of Siva and Parvati, after their
wedding. Lakshmi and Vishnu provided all the valuable household
goods. The Pramatha hordes decorated the surroundings with
flowers and festoons.

When they entered the wedding hall, the specially arranged
orchestra struck up soulful music, and the dancers and danseuses

110

111

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

began displaying their art with splendid skill. Hearing all that joyous
clamour, Parvati wanted to steal a glance at the wedding party from
the terrace of her palace. She was followed by her maids, who
made fun of her, for her impatience.

Menaka and Parvati fell prostrate at the feet of the image of
Ambika. The priests then performed the ‘Sahasra nama puja’ (the
chanting of the thousand names of the Goddess).

Siva happened to look up at that moment, and his eyes spoke
the language of silent communion to the lovingly reciprocating eyes
of Parvati. The hearts of the bride and the bridegroom were suffused
with indescribable mutual love. How strong is the love-impulse that
it should do overwhelm even the divine couple!

BRIDAL MAKE-UP
Parvati was given the auspicious bath. Then she was adorned
with all kinds of ornaments studded with every kind of precious
stone.
As the fully made-up Parvati saw herself in the mirror, she
found Siva’s reflexion instead of hers, saying how he was eagerly
awaiting the golden moment of joining hands with her and how he
wished he could place a beauty spot on her left cheek, which would
add an exotic touch to her pre-eminently graceful complexion!
When Parvati seemed to be enraptured in spite of herself and
lost in thought before the mirror, her maids made fun of her,
exclaiming how anxious she was to meet her lord.

WORSHIPPING THE DIVINE MOTHER
The pearl-studded palanquin was ready for the escorting of
Parvati to the temple of Ambika.
Menaka led the procession as the chaste ladies and the maids
carried the flower baskets and the golden vessels containing the
material for consecration and worship.
The palanquin-bearers set down the palanquin opposite the
Ambika temple. The shrine was reverberating with the sound of the
chiming bells and the recitation of the sacred scriptural hymns by
the priests.

When the bride broke the coconut on the sacred stone, the
fruit was divided into two equal halves a good omen.
After the worship by Parvati, the priests chanted the ‘Mantra
Pushpam’ and offered ‘Nirajanam’. Everyone saluted the holy
flame and received gratefully and worshipfully the consecrated
‘Prasadam’ (sacramental food) after the successful completion of
the entire ‘Puja’.

THE WEDDING OF SIVA AND PARVATI
The auspicious hour of the wedding was approaching. The
royal priest, Garga, and the brother of Parvati, Mainaka, went up
to the lodgings of the bridegroom’s party to welcome and bring
Siva to the wedding hall.
After the formal welcome by the bride’s representatives, the
bridegroom’s party set off to the palace of Himavan, as the demigods held the white canopy over Siva’s head and the Pramatha
hordes shouted the slogans hailing the glory of Lord Siva. They
were preceded by the group of musicians who struck up the band
with the wedding march.
Menaka and Himavan went forward to greet Siva and his party.
They sprinkled perfumed water on the groom and the guests, and
the chaste ladies completed their formal requirements of ceremonial
welcome.
Mainaka led Siva by the hand to the wedding altar. The priest
then welcomed Siva to his seat.
Then Parvati’s parents and the royal priest went to escort Parvati
to the wedding dais.

112

113

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

As the bride was approaching the altar, a golden garment was
used as a screen hiding the bride and the groom from seeing each
other till the exact auspicious moment of the ‘Muhurtam’.

daughter, who is entirely devoted to you. In doing so I am merely
returning to you the gift you yourself have granted me. Hereafter
you will be the protector and lover of her till eternity.”

THE ‘PRAVARA’ EPISODE

When the needed formalities--- such as placing the
consecrated paste on the head of the bride by the bridegroom
from underneath the screen--- were gone through, the screen
separating the couple was removed. At once they looked into
each other’s eyes ecstatically and significantly.

The ‘Pravara’ (lineage) of the bride and of the bridegroom has
to be recited before the wedding takes place.
The court priest of the Himalayan kingdom is not aware of
Siva’s ‘Pravara’. When asked for the information about his
‘Pravara’, Siva merely smiled and kept quiet. The Seven Sages
were disgusted with the ignorance and audacity of the priest. Narada
chided the priest: “Sir, your question is silly. Don’t you know that
the Source of all creation has no other source except Himself? Lord
Siva assumed this physical form because for the benefit of humanity;
else He has no need to take birth among us. Indeed, who can
understand the mystery of Siva’s immanence or transcendence?”.
Himavan was astounded.
Vishnu said that Narada spoke the truth.
‘Quite so’, said Brahma.
The rest of the gods and the sages expressed their approval in
similar words.
Himavan bowed to Siva and prayed for his forgiveness on
behalf of his priest.
To make amends the priest then recited the “Siva Stotra” (Paean
to Lord Siva).
Siva was pleased. He placed his feet in a golden plate. As
Menaka poured the consecrated water, Himavan washed the feet
of Siva, and then sprinkled the water that dropped from the feet on
his head. Similarly, he sprinkled the same water on the heads of his
wife and his daughter.
As a matter of form, Himavan presented Siva with four gold
rupees and said: “Lord Siva, I am now offering you my beloved

Now Menaka and Himavan stepped aside.
Siva put on the sacred thread and the golden bracelet
handed to him by Garga. The ‘Mangala Sutra’ (sacred
necklace with twin pendants, symbolising the wedded status
of a woman, which neither a widow nor a maiden should wear)
was passed around the honoured guests for their benedictory
handling, and, returned to Siva, was tied around the neck of
the bride by the bridegroom, to the accompaniment of holy
hymns and auspicious music.
After the wedding, Siva addressed the gathering and assured
them of His constant protection. He offered suitable gifts to Garga
and the Vedic scholars.

WEDDING FEAST
As the newly wed couple went round the holy fire, the FireGod obediently blessed them.
Then Himavan requested the guests to accept his hospitality
for the wedding feast. Menaka and Himavan went round the guests
and entreated them to eat the sumptuous fare to their heart’s content...
Parvati was seated next to Siva. According to tradition, the
woman must not start eating before her husband does so. Siva was
doing nothing. Parvati was at a loss as to what to do. As she sent a
sideglance towards her husband, he made a sign which suggested
that she begins eating first. She pointed her finger to his plate, to

114

115

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

indicate that he should start first. Again Siva signalled that she should
eat first. Parvati bent her head bashfully and kept quiet.

forgiveness for his folly. Pleased, Siva said: “Manmatha, fear not.
Go back to Indra’s court and resume your former activities”.

Mentally praying to Sita and Rama, Siva took tiny morsels of
various food-items, uttering the “Prana-ahutis” (‘grace’). Parvati
ate only those items which Siva did. When Siva placed a few morsels
of choice food in Parvati’s plate, she ate them as though they were
the most consecrated offerings of God. Meanwhile, the cup with
the porridge, which was near Parvati’s plate, disappeared. As she
turned towards her lord, he was seen drinking the porridge. She
softly asked him how the porridge tasted. He said ‘sour’, and added
that the only sweet thing in the world was in her heart. Once more
Parvati bent her head shyly.

Indra received Rati and Manmatha with gladness and due
honours, when they returned to paradise.

Brahma and Sarasvati, Vishnu and Lakshmi, and other
important guests, were observing this ‘love-play’ between Siva and
Parvati, with silent good humour.
After the wedding feast, the guests went to their respective
lodgings to take rest.
Siva and Parvati were seated on a diamond-studded throne,
exchanging small talk, concerning the various phases of their wedding
celebration. They were all praise for the hospitality of Menaka and
Himavan.

APPEAL
In the meantime Rati Devi approached Siva and lamented:
“Lord, at the behest of Indra, and for the benefit of the entire universe,
my husband disturbed your penance, Indeed he was indirectly
instrumental in bringing about your union with Parvati. On this auspicious
occasion, may I beseech you to restore my husband to me?”
The assembled goddesses joined Rati Devi in her rightful appeal.
Siva acceded to their request and brought back Manmatha to
fulllife. When Rati and Manmatha bowed to him, Siva suggested
that Manmatha seek a favour from him. Manmatha merely sought

GOOD MORNING
As the auspicious ‘Shehnai’ music was being played at dawn,
Parvati woke earlier than her husband, as became a devout wife.
The heralds of the morning were reciting the hymns sacred to
Siva. Before long Siva too woke up. The divine couple then blessed
all those that assembled there to worship them.

STROLLING IN THE GARDEN
That evening Siva and Parvati took a walk in the pleasure
garden. The deities of the forest bade them welcome, along with
the flora and fauna which seemed to flourish with greater splendour
at the arrival of the blessed pair in their midst.
As they sat on a moonstone seat by the side of a lake, the
royal swan couples began moving in the water with cadenced,
graceful motions.
Siva and Parvati were gratified to see that both the animate
and the inanimate world were sharing their felicity.

UNITY OF TRINITY
When they were alone, Parvati told Siva: “Lord, I am unable
to delve into the mystery of your actions. For example, you, Brahma
and Vishnu look like brothers. Kindly enlighten me on the true
relationship between you and the other two.
Siva said: “I am glad you want to be informed about this vital
matter, because this is something which many a wise man is curious
about. Actually, God is One. We three are the three facets of a
single Entity. By worshipping any one of us, the fruits or praying to
all of us will be enjoyed by the devotee. Brahma is responsible for

116

117

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

the creation, Vishnu for the preservation, and I for the extinction,
and re-creation, of the species. Similarly, you are like a sister to
Sarasvati and Lakshmi.”

penance has succeeded and you will be the consort of the supreme
Lord Siva. Be true to yourself and keep up the noble traditions of
both clans your husband’s and your parents.”

DUTIES OFA CHASTE LADY (PATIVRATA)

Menaka said: “Darling daughter, in you I saw the fulfilment of
all my dreams. I brought you up with the tenderest love. Now I
cannot bring myself to live without you in our midst. Yet I know you
are going to a new home which is the highest abode in the universe
physically as well as spiritually. Live up to your noblest ideals and
please your husband through thick and thin”.

Earlier, an elderly gentlewoman, Vipra Suvasini, formally spoke
to Parvati: “Princess, there is nothing worth knowing that you yourself
do not know. But it is our tradition to remind the bride, going to her
new home, of the duties she has to perform. It is by observing such
rules and regulations that the famous ladies of yore, like Savitri,
Anasuya and Arundhati, earned their undying renown in the history
of great women... you must eat only after your husband does. You
must go to bed after your husband sleeps, and wake up earlier than
he does. You must always act in a manner acceptable to him, and
must not retaliate even when he has occasion to reprimand you.
You must not stand idly at the main door of your house, and must
not visit neighbours without obtaining your husband’s permission.
Nor should you go all alone on a pilgrimage or attend any function
or public meeting. You must first consecrate the food to the family
deity, and serve it to your husband and the guests, before you yourself
eat. You must regard your husband as your living God and share his
joy and grief on all occasions.”
Parvati promised to abide by the sage counsel of the good
lady. All the women guests were pleased with Parvati’s humility and
sincerity.

FAREWELL
On the fifth day of the wedding celebrations, Parvati and Siva
were about to set off to mount Kailasa.
Himavan said: “Dear daughter, the Himalayas will look barren
in your absence. Even the flora and fauna around here seem to be
distressed at your leaving us. But I know a woman’s place is by her
husband’s side. We content ourselves with the happy fact that your

Parvati acknowledged the affection of her parents: “I am fully
aware of the love you have showered on me, dear parents. It is
equally painful for me to be parted from you. But my duty is by the
side of my husband. I promise to maintain the traditions of our two
families to the best of my ability”.
-- ---- -- ---- -- --- -- ---- -- ---- --- -- --- --- -- --- ---- --- -- --- --- -- --- --- ---Himavan and Menaka also bade fitting farewel to Siva and
begged him to look after their daughter tenderly. Siva replied suitable
and assured them of his constant love for Parvati.
Parvati was adorned with the traditional embellishments, as
befitting the bride leaving for her husband’s home Jaya and Vijaya
were sent as companions along with Parvati, with the command of
Menaka that they take care of the princess as the eyelids do the
eyes.
The golden palanquin was ready. Parvati ascended it, placing
the right foot in, first. All the traditional bridal materials were placed
beside her.
Lord Siva was riding on his Bull mount.
As Siva signalled the palanquin-bearers to start moving,
Menaka kissed Parvati for the last time, and the flora and fauna
requested Parvati not to forget them. Parvati reiterated her love for

118

119

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

all of them. The denizens of the Himalayaan capital stood on both
sides of the street as Parvati’s palanquin and siva’s bull passed by,
and shouted ‘Hail to Siva and Parvati. Siva and Parvati
acknowledged their greetings fittingly.

The silver mountain shone with supernatural splendour as the
newly married divine couple and their heavenly guests assembled
there and performed their apportioned duties with great eclat.

TEMPLE OF RAMA
As the divine couple approached the shrine of Rama, they
stepped down and paid their respects to Lord Rama and his spouse,
Sita. The priests of the temple welcomed them which due honours
and offered their blessings on behalf of Rama.
As Siva and Parvati bowed to Rama and Sita, the latter
appeared to be smilingly wishing them good luck. To the lookerson, Siva appeared in the image of Rama, and Parvati in that of Sita.
The devotees realised that it was all the divine mystery exhibited
by Siva as part of his creational sport (Lila).

SILVER MOUNTAIN
After passing through some lush and luxuriating forests, and
lovely and limpid lakes, wherein the wedding party performed their
diurnal ablutions dutifully, they reached Kailasa, the silver mountain,
which is the abode of Siva.
The whole hill felt enraptured and seemed to be inwardly
grateful to Parvati for having revived the zest for life of Lord Siva,
who was previously much run down physically, on account of his
rigorous penance.
Hearing the bugle calls of the welcoming Pramatha hordes, the
entire Kailasa cried out to the surrounding plant and animal life to
bid an enthusiastic welcome to the newly wed blessed couple.
As Siva and Parvati stepped down on Mount Kailasa, the
sun-god bade them welcome, and the pious ladies offered them
incense and other ceremonial forms of welcome.

Java and Vijaya whispered to Parvati: “This Silver Mountain
excels our Himalayas. Your dreams have come true. All the gossip
we heard about this being the home of the indigent is now proved to
be baseless”.
Parvati said: “Yes, Oh, how delighted my parents would have
been if they accompanised us here! Alas, they must be missing me
and grieving for me!”.
At that juncture Siva joined them and spoke to Parvati: “Dear,
I know you have come here, leaving behind all those good people
and your noble parents who have been showering their immense
affection on you. I already promised your parents to see that you
lack nothing to make your body and soul feel contented and delighted
in this new home of yours. I swear on all that I hold sacred that I will
contribute to your happiness in all circumstances and vicissitudes of
life. There! The peacocks are dancing in their full plumage. Let us
go and watch them.”
So saying, he led her to the lonely arbor nearby. There they
joined the peacocks in a lively dance. Later, bathing together in
perfumed water, they returned to the palace.
Jaya and Vijaya were overjoyed at the loveplay of Siva and
Parvati, and inwardly congratulated their friend on her good fortune
in getting such a deserving spouse.
Entering the main assembly hall, which was filled to capacity
with the guests, including Lakshmi and Vishnu, and Sarasvati and
Brahma, Siva entertained them all with grand hospitality and
magnanimity.
When the guests returned to their respective homes, after taking
their leave of Siva and Parvati, the newly wed retired to their inner

120

121

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

sanctum, which was furnished with all essential comforts by
Nandiswara, who stood guard outside.

imbi--ing the honey of love? Don’t you feel this westerly ‘Malaya’
breeze, which is exciting our senses? The moon is temporarily hiding
behind the clouds. This is the most opportune moment for us to
share our flowery soft bed.”

Siva ordered Nandi not to allow anyone inside, and the bullgod was standing guard watchfully.
As they entered the bedroom, Parvati’s right eye throbbed.
She was worried about that inauspicious omen. Seeing her
uneasiness, the all-knowing Siva assured her that she need not be
afraid of anything. She was encouraged by the fact that her
omnipotent Lord would see to it that no harm befell her.
When Siva pressed her to join him in a love-dance she willingly
did so. As the Kailasa orchestra played lilting tunes, the blessed
couple kept perfect time and forgot themselves in the ecstatic
entertainment. Outside, Nandi was smilingly struck with the fact
that the tender passion of the love between man and woman moves
even the divine beings so inexplicably.
Tired after the rapturous dance, the couple went on to the
terrace and seated themselves on a moonstone bench. Seeing them
engaged in a fond embrace, the stars appeared to be bowing their
bashfully.
Then, eating a few succulent fruits and drinking some sweet
cow’s milk, the couple began to converse in the manner of all the
great lovers of the world. Siva said: “Darling, you are exhausted
after all that wild dancing of ours. Come, let us go in and rest on the
flower-strewn bed.”
Parvati replied: “Lord, I know that you are proficient in the art
of love-making. You have also a wonderful gift of the gab. Actually,
that flower-filled bed is inviting you only.” As she was thus joking,
two crimson flowers fell at their feet of their own accord.
Parvati now lost her shyness and said: “Lord, don’t you see
the bees, sucking the honey in these ‘Mandara’ flowers, are singing
love-songs to us, as though asking us to follow their example of

So saying, she gently pushed her Lord towards the bed. As
Siva kissed her cheeks, she went a step further and kissed his lips.
The whole night was thus spent in an exceedingly joyous love-play
between the divine pair.
Early next morning Jaya and Vijaya knocked at the door, asking
their friend to come out for the morning ablution.
But neither Siva nor Parvati was yet willing to come out of the
bedroom. After a little while, Parvati asked Nandi to open the main
door. Siva went out.
When Siva left, Jaya told Parvati: “Friend, your hair is
dishevelled; your breasts are exuding a peculiar perfume; your
clothes are disarranged; your eyes are reddish, perhaps for want of
sleep!”
Vijaya said to Jaya: “Well, Jaya, don’t think that Parvati is all
that innocuous. She has tasted the full love of Siva, quite willingly.
She has stolen the heart of Siva and would not like to be away from
him even for a second. We have landed ourselves in a tough spot,
because we won’t be able to see much of Parvati and enjoy her
company! Let us go back to the Himalayas!”.
Knowing pretty well that her maids were only joking, Parvati
said: “ Friends, don’t be angry with me. Take these two diamond
necklaces, one for each of you. After all, you yourselves trained me
in the ways of the world, Is it fair that you should now leave me
alone here?.”
After a little more horse-play, the two maids took Parvati to
the bathroom and gave her a splendid oil-bath. After the bath, they
attended to Parvati’s make-up with meticulous detail. However,
they forgot to paint the beauty-spot on her cheek.

122

123

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Meanwhile Siva came there, with a smile on his lips, walking
quietly. Seeing him, the two girls silently went out. Siva came from
behind and closed Parvati’s eyes with his palms. She mistook the
gesture as part of her maid’s fun-making and shouted: “Don’t you
girls know that there is a time for playing the fool and time to be
serious? I will report your action to my husband and see that he
punishes you!.”

“The irritable sage Durvasa once went to meet Indra, while
the latter was enjoying the company of the celestial courtesan,
Rambha, under the shade of the Parijata tree. Seeing the approaching
sage, Rambha, who was in the arms of Indra was embarrassed and
ran away.

Lord Siva began to laugh boisterously. Realising her mistake,
she shyly hid her head in the arms of her husband, who then
embraced her fondly.
In such love-sport some days passed by.

WISE WORDS
In the meantime the misdeeds of Taraka were on the increase.
The very mention of his name struck terror in the hearts of the people.
Unwilling to approach Siva, during his early wedded life, the
gods went to meet Brahma, to report to him about their predicament.
Brahma, himself unable to deal with their complaint, took them to
Vishnu.
At Vaikuntha Vishnu was also engaged in love-play with
Lakshmi, but, informed about the arrival of the gods, Vishnu went
forward to receive them with due honour.
The gods appealed to Vishnu: “Lord, Taraka is increasingly
becoming cruel to us day by day. We are unable to approach Siva,
because he is preoccupied with the love-life. You alone are capable
of convincing Siva about his duty to save us.”
Vishnu replied: “Time is like a ripe fruit; either it is quite eatable
or it perishes. We have to bide our time. The love-sport of Siva will
last a thousand years, and then will Kumara Svami be born to Siva
and Parvati he who alone can quell Taraka. So let us not be impatient.
Anyway, it is sinful to disturb the newly married couple. I will tell
you a story to prove this point.

“Indra kept quiet, afraid of the curse of Durvasa. But, because
of his midsdeed, Durvasa’s wife died soon after. The lesson we
have to learn from this episode is that we must never disturb the
lovers engaged in their love-play. Be patient. Sooner or later Taraka’s
killer will be born to the divine couple.”
Satisfied with the assurance of Vishnu, the gods and Brahma
returned to their respective abodes.
A thousand years passed by. With the ceaseless love-making
of Siva and Parvati, the entire earth seemed to be standing still: the
atmosphere was devoid of air-flow; the celestial regions were
trembling; there were falling stars and meteors everywhere.
Again the gods had to run up to Brahma to seek a way out of
their calamity. And again Brahma and others met Vishnu, who
escorted them to Kailasa. Nandi was standing guard outside the
bedchamber. Vishnu asked him to convey the news of the arrival
of the visitors to Siva.
Nandi told Vishnu: “Lord, I have no right to enter the
bedchambler. Forgive me.” Vishnu suggested that the gods pray
to Siva, with the sacred Mantra, “Namah Sivaaya”, for thereby
the naturally benevolent Siva would come to their rescue
instantaneously.

APPEAL
The gods consecrated an idol of Siva and worshipped it thus:
“Lord Siva, Thou art the Saviour of the helpless devotees who seek
Thy refuge. Kindly live up to Thy name which means the One who

124

125

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

does Good and grants Happiness and save us from the atrocities of
Taraka.”

my motherhood, may your own wives become barren.” So cursing
the gods, she turned to the Fire-god and cursed him that he should
be a mere destroyer.

The naturally tender heart of Siva melted, on hearing their
worshipful appeal. He came out of the embrace of Parvati and,
telling her that he would soon return to her, presented himself before
the gods, who then fell prostrate at his feet. Asked for the reason of
their visit, the gods reported to him of Taaraka’s cruelty towards
them.
Siva told himself that if he acceded to the request of the gods,
he would have to displease Parvati and thereby go back on his
word to her parents that he would never cause her the least little
unhappiness. And yet, he convinced himself, that it was the duty of
good men to help others kith and kin, and that he could anyhow go
back to his beloved soon after discharging his duty by the gods.
Accordingly he told the gods: “I will release the semen
embedded in my conscious self through my power of Yoga. But
only the god of Fire can accept it.”
At the request of the gods, the Fire-god received the semen,
by assuming the form of a pigeon.
The gods, Brahma and Vishnu thanked Siva for his magnanimity.

IMPRECATION
Here Parvati felt bad omens. Worried, she ran up to her
husband. The gods were uneasy about what sort of trouble was in
store for them and the world. Even Siva was fighting shy of greeting
his spouse in his characteristic style. Learning about the release of
her Lord’s semen, she was inconsolably dejected. She felt that her
lifelong wish had been unfulfilled. Being a chaste lady, she would
not reprimand her husband, but scolded the gods: “You wretched
people, have you sacrificed my pleasure for the sake of your selfish
ends? Don’t you know that it is the supreme wish of every woman
to be a mother? You who have been instrumental in depriving me of

So speaking, she took her husband to their bedroom.

LAMENT
Parvati spoke to her husband: “Lord, I know you are at the
beck and call of your devotees. But was it not to receive your grace
that I performed a rigorous penance? Is this the favour you grant
me? Are these gods dearer to you than your own wedded wife?
What harm have I done you? Are you not aware of the strong wish
of women for children of their own? Couldn’t you think of some
other means of punishing Taraka? At least, could you not have
confided in me before taking theis extreme step?”.
So speaking, she gave herself up to uncontrollable sobbing.

SOLACE
Siva replied: “Dear, I quite appreciate your grief. But please
let me remind you of the purpose behind our marriage. Was it not
the gods that invoked me to discard my penance and get married?
The idea was to see the birth of the killer of Taaraka. Such a killer
cannot be one who comes of a normal birth, through the womb of a
woman. My boon to Taraka was that he could not be killed by
anyone who came out of woman’s womb. Don’t you see that I
cannot go back on my word? Indeed there is none dearer to me
than you in this world, but it is the duty of people like us to sacrifice
our own wishes for the welfare of the others. If we ourselves forsake
our duty, would the rest of the world respect its obligation? You are
verily the Supreme Mother. Still, I did not want to inform you and
face your disappoinment, before I took this dutiful step of mind.”
Parvati, as became her divine heritage, was duly consoled.
She regretted cursing the gods and the Fire-gods. She realised that
it was to her credit that she was indirectly responsible for the birth

126

127

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

of a son who would save the world from the onslaught of a demon.
She sought her husband’s forgiveness. As a sign of his forgiveness,
Siva took her into his arms. Parvati was ecstatically gratified...

Margaseersha, at dawn, it was born as a child who was resplendent
like the sun, with six heads and twelve hands to the accompaniment
of Vedic chanting and the super natural sound of ‘AUM’.

The Fire-god, unable to withhold the semen of Siva for long,
prayed to Him for relief. Siva appeared before him and assured him
that before long the semen would take birth and relieve him of his
burden.

The joyous gods blessed the child by showering flowers from
heaven on him.

STRANGE WISH
The seven sages, with their spouses seated beside them, began
a sacrificial rite. As they were offering the oblations to the Fire-god,
his mind was attracted to the wives of the sages. Verily, such mental
aberrations precede the fall of men. However, the Fire-god was
hesitant to express his amorous wish to the wives of the sages directly.
Lust is an inexorable instinct. Else, would it blind such an
individual as the Fire-god to propriety?
Unable to bear the heat of his passion, the Fire-god wished to
take his own life, and with that aim walked up to a stream. At that
juncture his sagacious wife, Svahaa Devi, successively assuming
the forms of the sage-wives with the exception of that of the
unimpeachable Arundhati, fulfilled the wish of her husband. At the
same time, Svahaa Devi was herself unable to hold for long the
semen of Siva which was deposited in her through her husband,
and so released it on the White Mountain (Svetaadri).
The mountain was uncomfortably stirred by the heat of that
semen and at the behest of the Air-god, to whom it prayed, it threw
up the semen into the nearby Ganges. Ganga, too, could not tolerate
the force of the semen and sprinkled it out in the Darbha jungle.

BIRTH OF KUMAARA SVAMI (SKANDA)
In course of time, the semen of Siva developed into a viable
fetus. At last on the sixth day of the bright fortnight of the month of

Hearing the glad news, the wives of the six sages went to visit
the newborn, on seeing whom their breasts began oozing milk.
Kumara Svami sucked their milk to his heart’s content. The surrogate
mothers could hardly bring themselves to leave the child and go
back to their husbands.
Brahma christened the child ‘SKANDA’.
As Siva was engaged in his love-play with Parvati on mount
Kailasa, he felt the presence of Skanda before his mind’s eye. Seeing
her husband absent-minded, Parvati asked him the reason for his
distraction.
Siva told her: “Indeed today is a festival day for us and the
entire universe. Skanda, the killer of Taraka, was born. You could
not have withstood the force of the semen that conceived him,
anyway. So don’t be angry with me any more on that account.
However, I grant that I will sire through you the twenty-one
incarnations of Ganapati”.
The newborn Kumara Svami was various named, according to
the various connotations of his conception: ‘Skanda’ (“skandati iti”),
because Siva’s semen was scattered or ejaculated at the sight of
the sage-wives; ‘Agni-bhuh’ (“agneh bhavati iti”), because he
emanated from the Fire-god; ‘Gangeya’ (“Gangayah nandanah iti”),
because the semen was for a while accepted by Ganga; ‘Sarajanmaa’ (“Sara-aakhye thrine janma yasya sah”), because his
evolution was from the semen scattered among the grass called
‘Sara’; and ‘Kartikeya’ (“Krittikanam apatyam”), because he was
conceived, in transition, by the six ‘Krittika’s (wives of the sages).

128

129

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Parvati was pleased with Siva’s explanation and assurance,
and was eager to see Skanda. She told him: “Lord, Skanda is like
my own child. Please send Nandi to fetch him here”.

plane. Brahma and Vishnu, accompanied by the hosts of the gods
left for Kailasa to welcome Skanda at that mount.

Siva was delighted with Parvati’s large-heartedness, and
commissioned Nandi to bring Skanda to Kailasa.
Nandi went to the Darbha jungle and told Skanda: “prince,
by seeing you I feel my life is sanctified. Siva and Parvati are anxiously
awaiting your arrival at mount Kailasa. come along with me.”

BRAVE DEEDS
The six Krittikaas told Nandi: “Sir, how are Siva and Parvati
occupying themselves now? Don’t think that Skanda is an ordinary
person. His mount is a mighty peacock. He is a valiant hero who,
even as a child, is capable of twisting the trunks of the gigantic
elephants on the White Mountain. He plays with the lions. Taking
up the Siva-bow he cut off the hill-tops with his fierce arrows. He
turned the huge Krancha mountain into powder, and shouted with
such resounding joy at his feat as to frighten and shake up the four
corners of the earth, and even caused some stars to fall from the
sky. The demons on that mountain fought with him and died at his
hands. When Indra flung his disc-weapon at him, to ward off his
frightening feats, which harmed the elements, Skanda rebutted it so
easily as to make the Indra weapon return to Indra and attack the
latter. When Indra begged Skanda’s forgiveness, the Latter allowed
him to go unharmed.

JOURNEY TO KAILASA
Skanda told Nandi: “Well, my parents have invited me after
such a long while. Anyway, these six Krittikas nourished me like my
true mother. I don’t feel like leaving them behind here. Let us take
them also along with us. Now get the Pushpaka aeroplane ready.”
Then the party left in the aircraft singing the hymns consecrated
hymn to Lord Siva. The gods showered flowers on the Pushpaka

To the messenger who conveyed the news of Skanda’s arrival
Parvati presented a diamond necklace. Jaya and Vijaya who saw
that presentation were a little envious of the messenger. Judging
their jealous looks correctly, Parvati chided her maids: “Forget this
idiotic outlook. Skanda was born to fulfil a divine purpose. It is
immaterial whether I directly conceived Skanda or whether the
Krittikas did so, because it was in making love to me that Siva’s
semen was extracted, in the first place. Skanda is virtually my own
child. So get everything ready for his comfort and well-being.”
The maids understood their folly and did as told by Parvati.

WELCOME
As the Pushpaka airplane touched down on mount Kailasa,
and Skanda and his six ‘mothers’ stepped out of it, the entire
populace of Siva’s realm bade them a rousing welcome and shouted
‘Hail Kaartikeya! Hail Skanda!’.
As the gods spread roses along his path, Skanda walked up
to Siva and Parvati, reciting the Vedic hymns. With hands
outstretched, his parents welcomed him fondly. Skanda first,
following sacred tradition, bowed to the feet of Parvati. She was
not quite aware of the exact blessing she should utter. So she took
him into his arms. As she did so, milk flowed out of her breasts, out
of her motherly love for Skanda. Skanda could then appreciate
how ineffably tender the motherly heart of women in general, and of
Parvati in particular, is.
When he next fell prostrate at the feet of Siva, the latter blessed
him with the words, “ May you live long!”, and embraced him.
Skanda was ecstatically gratified by that divine touch of his father.
Jaya and Vijaya offered Skanda the water to clean his feet and
to drink. Brahma, Vishnu, Indra and other godly dignitaries saluted
Skanda appropriately.

130

131

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

The Gandharvas sang and the Apsaras danced, by way of
welcoming the divine guest.

bird, a beautiful peacock; the Arna-deity, a gigantic ‘Dhvaja’ and a
lovely copper ornament while Parvati blessed him with longevity
and renown; Lakshmi, with luxury and wealth; and Sarasvati, with
all learning.

UPANAYANAM
(SACRED THREAD CEREMONY)

DEVASENA

On the very day Skanda arrived at Mount Kailasa, his parents
decided upon performing his Upanayanam.

Devasena is the daughter of Indra, the Lord of Heaven. In a
dream she saw the effulgent form of Skanda. His radiant looks stole
her heart. She was determined to be his lifemate. As she stood,
bashfully bending her head, she felt the presence fell prostrate at his
feet, in deep reverence.

The waters from the seven seas were collected for the holy
sprinkling. In the vast pandals the seven sages were performing the
Homa sacrifice. Parvati and Siva sat on either side of Skanda.
Siva and Parvati placed the sacred thread (Yajnopavitam),
reciting the sacred ceremonial Mantra, which connotes that this
primoridal adornment of the Lord Creator, now worn by the initiate,
would ensure his good health, personal splendour and longevity:
Yajnopavitam paramam pavitram
Prajaapateh yat sahajam purastaat|
Aayushyam agryam pratimuncha subhram
Yajnopavitam balam astu tejah||
As dicatated by the priest, Siva intiatied Skanda in the
Gaayatri Mantra, which prays to the Supreme Spirit for the
invoking of the worshipper’s sublime supra-consciousness. Besides,
Siva taught Skanda several of the martial arts and the spiritual studies
concerning God.
Siva honoured the six Krittikaas and the other guests suitably.
All the assembled guests sprinkled the consecrated rice
(Akshatalu) on the bachelor’s head and blessed him that he might
lead the life of a good scholar, with appropriate awareness of
Brahma, as befitting a ‘Braahmana’. Lord Vishnu lovingly presented
Skanda with a crown fitted with precious gems, a golden disc and a
garland of choice flowers. The Sun-god gave him the ‘Manojava’
chariot, which has the speed of the mind’s flight; the Moon-god, the
Vessel of Nectar; the Sea-god, the priceless diamonds; the Garuda

Skanda embraced her ardently. Devasena shone with joyous
delight. Her maids began singing the aubades. Waking up from her
dream, Devasena saw no sign of Skanda. Disappointed, she
accompanied her maids to the bathroom and, finishing her toilet,
was gossiping with them.

REPENTANCE
Here Indra was telling himself: “Foolishly had I flung the ‘Vajra’
weapon at Skanda. Indeed he was magnanimous in letting me go
unharmed, when I was about to be hoist with my own petard. Now
it is neither weapons nor jewels that can repay my debt of gratitude
to Skanda. The greatest gift I can offer Skanda is my beautiful
daughter. Thereby I can also win the appreciation of his parents.
Skanda is sure to accept the hand of my very accomplished daughter.
Else, the gods would persuade him to do so. I am sure of having my
wish fulfilled, for my right eye is throbbing, as a sign of good omen”.
After this soliloquy, Indra escorted Devasena to Kailasa. None
of the courtiers in that realm of Siva detected the real reason behind
escorting Devasena to Kailasa. The Trinity of gods and their consorts,
of course, knew all about it, and were quietly smiling among
themselves.
Seeing Devasena, Skanda was spellbound. On her side,
Devasena was equally attracted by the actual sight of the handsome

132

133

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

person she saw in her dream, and was shyly standing with bent
head. Siva and Parvati, who discovered the secret behind the young
people’s reactions, were inwardly delighted.

Indra’s realm. Parvati blessed him to complete his mission
successfully and return home safely.

WEDDING
Skanda soliloquised: “How indescribably lovely is this
Devasena!. Well as she is embellished with all those precious jewels,
and the ornamental forms of make-up, I am struck with her sidelong
glance of love she directs towards me, even as she remains with her
head bowed.
The Trinity, the seven sages and Parvati approached Devasena
and Skanda. Indra placed Devasena’s hands in those of Skanda.
Parvati and Siva, and the other guests, blessed the young couple.
The bride and groom bowed to the feet of the Trinity, Parvati and
Indra. The gods in heaven showered flowers of benediction on them.
The whole mount Kailasa felt thrilled. The Pramatha hordes shouted
victorious slogans.
The parents and the guests offered a variety of invaluable gifts
to the newly-wed. When Lakshmi and Sarasvati offered garlands
to Skanda, he appeared in his six heads, but when Devasena was
about to garland him, he assumed a single-headed shape.
Later a grandly sumptuous wedding feast was arranged by
Siva and Parvati. The guests found that day one of the most
memorable in their lives. Once again blessing the couple, the guests
bade farewell to Siva and Parvati, and returned to their homes.

ACCORD
Again the seven sages approached Lord Siva and complained
to him: “Lord, you are aware of the ever-increasing vile deeds of
Taaraka. Now that the person who is capable of killing the demon
is born, please permit Skanda to do his apportioned duty”.
Siva gladly agreed to do so. At his father’s bidding, Skanda,
accompanied by his spouse, Devasena, was ready to leave for

Skanda and Devasena together bowed to the feet of Siva and
Parvati before being escorted by Indra and Sachi Devi to the latter
pair’s celestial kingdom.
Indra commissioned the divine architect, Visva Karma, to build
a mighty edifice for the residency of Skanda and Devasena. Brahma
and Vishnu and their spouses were invited to stay in the guest houses.

ANOINTMENT (ABHISHEKA)
The water from all the sacred waters was fetched. Skanda
was seated on a diamond throne. The sacred dot was placed on his
bright forehead. Later he wore silken clothes presented by the gods.
After the completion of the ceremonial anointment, Vishnu
blessed Skanda to be the lord of the whole universe. Brahma
blessed Skanda to become adept in all the Vedas and rule the world
for the benefit of the virtuous and the detriment of the vicious.
Skanda thanked all the divine hosts who honoured and blessed
him, and promised to live up to their hopes in him.
After the coronation, the guests went their way, singing the
praises of Skanda among themselves.
Now seated in the coronation hall Skanda invited the gods to
perform the embassy that should precede his victorious deed. But
none of them dared to come forward for that purpose, and placed
the entire burden of punishing Taraka on his broad shoulders.

MESSAGE
Then Skanda called forth Virabahu and asked him to go to
Taaraka and warn the demon that unless he mended his evil ways
and went back to his Bhogavati city in the Patala, nether-world, he
should be prepared to meet his end at the hands of Skanda.

134

135

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

The next morning, as Taaraka assembled his court, Virabahu
went up to him and conveyed Skanda’s warning to him.

planning a strategic stranglehold on the enemy’s forces, the
adventurous Skanda blew his conch with extreme vigour. That sound
broke the hearts of the demons. The commanders of Taaraka’s
army ordered their men to fight.

REBUFF
Angered by the warning of Virabahu, Taaraka said: “You foolish
messenger, you repeated your Lord’s warning like a parrot. I am
letting you go unpunished, because it is not right to hurt a messenger.
I have not done any harm either to Siva or to his son, Skanda. Why
should they try to fight with me? In fact, the people who came in the
way of Parvati’s direct conception are the gods; the person who
flung his Vajra weapon at Skanda is Indra. How can these misdeeds
be offset by Skanda’s mere marrying of Indra’s daughter? Anyway,
I am not worried about Skanda’s warning. Even if the skies fall
down or the seven seas dry up or the sun and the moon fall to the
ground, I am not going to return to my kingdom and I shall gladly
face Skanda in battle. You might as well warn Skanda that I myself
am a devotee of Siva, and challenging me to a fight does not do him
any good.”
Later in the night Skanda appeared in a dream to Taraka.
Saluting Skanda, Taraka said: “Dear Skanda, am I not virtually your
devotee, too, by virtue of my being a great devotee of your own
father? has it fair on the part of Indra to kill my father when he was
fighting with the demon, Vritra? Am I not, therefore, justified in hurting
the killer of my father? Although I have a high regard for you, it is
not heroic to turn my back and flee from you on the battlefield. If I
conquer you, I will gain eternal fame, and if you vanquish me, I shall
be united with Lord Siva. Either way it is right that I should not heed
your warning. So here are my deep respects for you; please accept
them.”
When he woke up, Taaraka saw no sign of Skanda.

When Skanda was blowing his conch, Taaraka was engaged
in worshipping the image of Lord Siva. He mistook that sound as
coming from Lord Siva’s conch. He chided the god thus: “Lord, art
Thou going back on your word? How art Thou justified in calling
the very person to fight, whom Thou hast favoured with Thy boon?”.
At that point Taaraka felt that He saw Skanda in the image of Siva.
He was perplexed.
Then Taraka’s wife came to him and said: “Lord, the person
who blew the conch is Skanda. not Siva. I have reliable news that
Siva has not arrived on the battlefield. May I suggest that you do
not fight with Skanda? He now has a stranglehold on our forces,
and when defeat is inevitable, the correct strategy is to seek a truce
with the foe. Please concede the kingdom of heaven to Skanda
honourably. Thereby your renown will increase. The earthly kingdom
that you reign is large enough for you.”
Taraka replied: “Dear, I am sorry I cannot accept your advice.
Indara is a self-seeking strategist. He made Skanda his son-in-law
to serve his own selfish ends. Just because he is Indra’s son-in-law,
should Skanda fight with me? Should he not really ask his father-inlaw to seek a compromise with me, who am a devotee of Lord
Siva? Now, behave like the wife of a hero, and don’t advise me to
run away from an honourable battle.”
Finishing his prayers, Taaraka went out and saw the forces of
Skanda surrounding his palace. Ordering his men to repulse Skanda’s
forces, Taaraka went into his palace.

BATTLE

BATTLEFIELD

As the trumpets were blaring early next morning, the army of
Skanda surrounded the capital of Taaraka’s realm Sonitapura.

Many a solider died in the ensuing fierce fight, becoming easy
prey to the eagles. At the sun set, the battle for the day was stopped.

136

137

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

The generals of Taaraka’s army went to consult him. After the
consultations, it was decided to fight against the labyrinth-formation
of Skanda’s forces with a circular formation of their own.

The next day, Taaraka, aimed his fierecest weapon, the Mahaa
Sakti, at Skanda, who broke it into pieces with the aid of his own
Brahma weapon. Thus for twenty-one days the battle continued,
without victory for either side.

The night passed by inevitably. The next morning both Skanda
and Taraka offered prayers to their respective Siva idols and eagerly
went forward to the battlefield.
Both the antagonists were seated in a chariot and looked at
each other. While Skanda was smiling, Taraka was uneasily fearing
that the god of death, himself was facing him in the form of Skanda.
The arrow Taraka aimed at the feet of Skanda ricocheted and
returned to its quiver.
The rebound arrow whispered into Taraka’s ear: “O demonking, how innocuous you are! How I feel the divine ecstasy of
touching the noble feet of Skanda! If only you, too, would enjoy
similar bliss by falling prostrate at his feet! Even now it is not too
late. Don’t walk into the trap the gods set for you, and seek truce
with Skanda.”
Taraka replied: “Well, arrow, you yourself are the ignorant one,
for you do not seem to realise that if I die at the hands of Skanda I
will be united in spirit with Lord Siva. I will have no more rebirth,
which is what every seeker of Truth and Salvation cherishes most.
You were sanctified by touching the feet of Skanda; so should I
also very much like to be.”
Then Taraka ordered his army to cut into pieces the soldiers
of Skanda. Unable to withstand the attack of the demons the army
of the gods took to its heels. At the importunate request of Indra,
Skanda threw the Pasupata weapon, which forced the demons to
flee hither and thither. The Pasupata weapon lets of the enemy that
flees from it.
Dejected and humiliated, Taaraka went back into his palace.
He was convinced that it was impossible to defeat Skanda

At last Narada advised Skanda to break the idol of Siva ,
(which Taaraka was using as a pendant around his neck and which
was till then making the demon invincible.) by flinging the Fire-weapon
(Aagneya-astra). The sage also further suggested to Skanda to
pray to the sun-god to build temples out of the scattered pieces of
the Siva-image, which would drop from the neck of Taraka, for,
otherwise, the image would again form itself into a full-fledged
necklace and adorn Taaraka’s neck.
Accordingly Skanda worshipped the Sun-god, by reciting
“Aaditya Hridayam”, and placed the burden of converting the
image-pieces into sacred shrines on His shoulders.
Here, again, boasting that he is also a devotee of Lord Siva,
Taaraka renewed the ferocious attack on Skanda. Taaraka’s
‘Mahesvara’ missile scared away the godly forces, with its severe
flames, and they took refuge behind Skanda’s back. Even Skanda
fell in a swoon by the touch of the heat of the Mahesvara missile.
Taraka laughed boisterously, under the impression that his was the
victory. But Virabhadra was getting ready to put an end to the demonking. However, sage Narada persuaded him to desist and leave the
task of killing Taraka to Skanda himself.

THE END OF TARAKASURA
After a little while, Skanda regained consciousness. Seeing
him get up, the celestial army’s morale grew high. They massacred
many a demon. Taraka’s charmed weapons were no longer fulfilling
their intended mission. Skanda broke the Siva-idol-pendant around
Taaraka’s neck into five pieces with his Fire-missile. The Sun-god
built five Saivite temples with them, which are known as the ‘PanchaBhimeswara-Linga’s.

138

139

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Taraka’s strength was dwindling. At the suggestion of an aerial
voice, Skanda flung the ‘Brahma’ missile at Taaraka. The weapon
out Taraka into two separating the trunk from the head. The head
of Taraka fell at the feet of Skanda and begged him to grant ultimate
union with the spirit of Lord Siva. Skanda was deeply moved by
Taraka’s valour and devotion, and said ‘so be it’.

He was wondering how he could speak to her about Narada’s
prophecy without hurting her feelings.

The gods praised the bravery of Skanda and showered flowers
on him. The Trinity blessed and congratulated him. They all
expressed their gratitude to Indra for his hospitality. Parvati invited
Skanda to return to Kailasa, along with his wife.

Realising that his husband was distracted, Devasena did so,
and stood near him with dutiful obedience. Later when she tried to
fan him or apply sandalwood paste to his body, in order to comfort
him, Skanda appeared to be petulant and refused her services.
Actually, the couple spent that night in separate beds.

Skanda and Devasena left for the Silver Mountain. Indra sent
with them number of attendants and a large amount of treasures.
Parvati and Siva welcomed the newly-wed with open arms when
they reached Kailasa. Parvati led the young couple to a richly
decorated huge bedroom, wherein they were enjoying themselves
to their heart’s content.

NARADA’S PROPHECY
After some time Skanda went on hunting, along with his retinue.
The quarrel-loving Narada happen to see them. Approaching the
hunting party, and after receiving their hospitality, Narada told
Skanda: “Lord, there is a place called Pulinda-pura nearby. The
realm is being ruled by a Bhil (tribal) king. He is a devotee of Lord
Siva. He has a lovely daughter, named Valli. I had an opportunity of
casting her horoscope and reading her future. I want to tell you that
she will be your wife before long.” So saying, he vanished.
Skanda was much pleased. His retinue complimented him on
his good luck. After having their fun and sports in the forest, Skanda
and party returned to the Siver Mountain.
Devasena escorted her husband to the bathroom and helped
him in having his bath. After the bath, she led him to a diamondstudded seat and served him a sumptuous meal. Skanda seemed to
be absent-minded, because his thoughts were directed towards Valli.

Skanda said: “Darling, I am tired after the hunting in the jungle
and am not very hungry. I can’t eat this heavy food. Just give me a
glass of cow’s milk. I will drink it and take rest.”

DREAM-GIRL
Skanda managed to sleep restlessly before dawn. He dreamt
that a well-bedecked and supremely lovely maiden was offering
him flowers and singing and dancing for him by way of welcoming
him to her. Skanda beckoned her to ‘come near’. Walking in graceful
style she moved towards him and bowed to his feet. The touch of
hers thrilled Skanda, and he took her into his arms. At that moment
the early morning ‘reveille’ sounded and Skanda woke up to find
out that it was all a dream. Devasena was still asleep.

NARADA’S MISSION
Narada went to Pulindapura and was duly received by the
Bhill king and his queen.
Accepting his hospitality, Narada told the king: “O Bhil king,
where is your darling daughter? She is accomplished in all ways
and extremely beautiful. She has now come of age, and you should
now think about finding a suitable husband for her.”
The king sent for his daughter, who came to the court and
saluted the sage respectfully. The sage blessed her with the wish
that she would soon be well married.

140

141

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

The Bhil king, Pulinda, told the sage: “Sir, you are cognisant of
the part, the present and the future. Please read my daughter’s palm
and tell us what sort of husband she will get and where he is now.”

Skanda replied: “I am not a ‘Sathagopher’. I started on a
pleasure walk in the forest. My friends escorted me to this garden.
I am attracted by this beautiful place. My name is Skanda; my
residence is Kailasa; and my parents are Siva and Parvati. Sage
Narada told me that the king of this country is a great devotee of
Lord Siva and that his daughter is incomparably good-looking. I
just wanted to take a look at her. Now I am very much pleased at
her sight and my mission is fulfilled. So may I take my leave of
you?”

Narada replied: “You are all lucky people. The great Skanda
is going to be Valli’s husband. Before long someone in the guise of
a Bhill will come to you and ask for her hand.”

STROLL IN THE GARDEN
Valli went for a stroll in the pleasure-garden, along with her
friends. Narada’s words were still delightfully ringing in her ears.
She was anxious to see the Siva-off-spring. The singing birds and
the sweet flowers were enhancing her restless longing to see Skanda.
After wandering about here and there, she sat on a moonstone bench.
At that juncture there was a stir in the garden, as the deer
began to run hither and thither, sighting a hunter. The birds were
flying higher and higher. The ‘Malaya’ breeze was blowing gently.
Valli felt some good omens. She could then hear the whispers of
Skanda’s retinue from behind the bushes. She was reminded of the
sage’s prophecy, and eagerly awaiting the appraoch of Skanda.
Skanda, in the guise of a Bhil (huntsman), came forward, after
instructing his men to stay behind the bushes.
Valli hid herself behind her mates, and was stealing sidelong
glances at Skanda from between their ranks.

WITTY CONVERSATION
Valli’s maids were well-versed in the ways of the world, and
greeted the false hunter thus: “Sir, you look like a stranger. We are
surprised at your manners. You not only entered a private garden
without permission but are also stealing amorous glances at our
princess. You seem to be unaware of the fact that no stranger is
allowed into this garden. Anyway, who are you, what is your name
and who are your parents?”

The maids stopped him and said: “Sir, you seem to be very
clever. We heard that the person who killed Taaraka has six heads.
Why do we see you only with a single head? Are you trying to
deceive us? If Lord Siva sent word to our king, asking the hand of
our princess for Skanda, would not His wish has been rightaway
fulfilled, because our king is an obedient devotee of His? Tell us the
truth behind all this strategy of yours.”
As Skanda looked back, he could see Valli smiling at him and
standing with quiet grace and bashfulness.
Emboldened, Skanda approached her and said: “Dear Valli,
you are very fortunate. Your father is going to be the brother-in-law
of Lord Siva. I know Narada’s words will come true. I merely put
on this guise because I thought it was fitting to enter the Bhil realm
like a Bhil. I will go back to Kailasa and speak to my father about
my wish to marry you. Soon your father will hear from him. Now I
will reveal my real form, if only to satisfy the curiosity of your maids”.
Seeing the six heads of Skanda, Valli and her maids were
astounded. As the maids stepped aside, Valli bowed to the feet of
the resplendent Skanda. At her request, Skanda again assumed the
form of a tribal (Bhil). At that juncture the Bhil king arrived on the
scene. He did not accost the stranger, but took away his daughter
to the palace.

142

143

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

PANGS OF SEPARATION

took her to my home and brought her up as my own dear daughter.
All along I was feeling that it was due to the grace of Lord Siva that
I found Valli. And now that she has grown up into a nubile young
woman, I was delighted to hear from sage Narada that she would
be the daughter-in-law of Lord Siva. Please note that the bridegroom
is none other that the great Skanda, the offspring of Lord Siva.
Kindly bless the young couple and accept my hospitality.”

Disappointed with the Bhil king’s action, Skanda soliloquised:
“Even if the Bhil king and my parents accede to my wish, how can
I pacify Devasena who may not like to share my love with another
woman? Indeed, the quarrel-loving Narada put me in a fix. Anyway,
I can’t go back to Kailasa without taking mother look at the lovely
Valli.”
Valli straight away went to bed. She would not touch the
delicious food served by her maids. All the efforts of her friends to
comfort her were in vain. At last she dozed off restlessly and in a
dream saw Skanda to whom she spoke: “Lord, I am a helpless
woman. I always obey my parents. I could not disobey my father
when he took me away from your beloved presence. Nor could I
find the strength to inform my father that you are the son of Lord
Siva. But I assure you I am completely devoted to you and will be
yours till eternity. Take me and accept my gratitude for coming to
me.” Learning from Valli’s mates about these words, which she
uttered aloud in her dream, her parents were pleased.
Later Valli’s parents went up to meet Skanda, who was sitting
all alone on the banks of a lake, in the guise of a Bhil. The Bhil king
apologised to him for not greeting him when he was unaware of
Skanda’s real identity. He also promised Skanda the hand of Valli.
Skanda appreciated the king’s words and said that he would
gladly marry Valli.

WEDDING
Everything was ready for the wedding of Skanda and Valli.
The whole town of Pulindapura was richly decorated.
As the auspicious hour of the wedding approached, the Bhil
king, Pulinda, addressed the invited guests: “Dear denizens of
Pulindapura and guests, once when I was wandering in the forest I
heard the cries of an infant. Since I have no children of my own I

Then the elderly men of the Bhil tribe stood at Skanda’s side,
and the elderly Bhil women stood at the side of Valli. They offered
garlands to the young couple. Valli and Skanda garlanded each other.
The Bhil king presented a diamond necklace to Skanda, and a
necklace studded with the nine precious gems to Valli.
After the priest recited the wedding hymns, the bride and groom
went round the sacred fire and promised each other eternal fidelity
and love.
After witnessing the due pomp and pageantry, befitting the
wedding of royal couple, the guests were duly honoured and feasted
by the Bhil king.
Once again thankfully receiving the blessing of the wedding
guests, Skanda and Valli retired to their bedroom.

THE STORY OF DEVASENA
Skanda revealed to Valli: “Darling, I once vanquished Indra.
He then sought my forgiveness for attacking me, and as a token of
his contrition offered me his daughter’s hand in marriage. I accepted
the offer. She is named Devasena, and we have been living together
in perfect marital bliss. She is prepared to make any sacrifice for
the sake of my happiness. I never meant to leave her. But as I was
wandering in the forest with my friends, Narada prophesied that
you would be my second wife. My curiosity was naturally aroused,
and when I actually saw you I fell in love with you. I swear that I will

144

145

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

never cause you any distress. I also assure you that Devasena will
not come in the way of our mutual enjoyment. You two can live like
sisters, and the Trinity and their spouses will stand by through thick
and thin.”

conduct myself there as to keep up your renown and to enhance
the traditional glory of the clans of both my husband’s and mine.”

VALLI’S BROAD-MINDEDNESS

Devasena learnt about the wedding of Skanda and Valli, and
took no offence, because it was all the doing of the sage Narada.
She was getting ready to welcome the newly-wed with due grace.

Valli, instead of being offended, was really pleased with
Skanda’s revelation. She was impressed by Skanda’s depiction of
Devasena’s generous attitude towards him, and said: “Lord, I am
prepared to be even a servant maid of Devasena, far from being
her rival.”
Skanda was much relieved to learn about Valli’s cheerful
acceptance of her role. Indeed he was ashamed of his own fickleness,
as compared with the large-hearted attitude of his two consorts.
Skanda and Valli spent that night in complete physical and
spiritual communion.

JOURNEY TO KAILASA
Early next morning the young couple finished their ablution and
were ready to leave for Kailasa.
Valli’s mother handed them several rich gifts to be conveyed
to Parvati and Devasena.
Pulinda told Skanda: “Dear son-in-law, what greater happiness
do I have than offering to Lord Siva’s son the gift that the Lord
Himself gave me? I brought her up with the utmost tenderness. I am
sure you will look after her with your highest love and affection.
Kindly convey my devotional regards to your divine parents.”

Then, after bidding a tearful farewell to her parents. Valli
accompanied Skanda on their journey to Kailasa.

Siva and Parvati were also pleased with the second wedding
of their son.
As Valli and Skanda reached the Silver Mountain, the Pramatha
hordes sounded the bugles in royal welcome. Siva, Parvati and
Devasena, followed by their retinue, went forward to greet the
newly-wed with open arms.
Valli and Skanda bowed to the feet of Siva and Parvati. Parvati
joked: “Sun, you are indeed romantic!”. Skanda was mildly
disconcerted; again so, when Devasena looked at him with silent
humour. As Valli bowed to Parvati the latter blessed her: “May you
live long like a chaste lady (who would never be widowed)!”. She
also complimented her on finding such a divine spouse like Skanda.
Valli touched the feet of Devasena in reverence, saying: “Kind
lady, my wedding to Skanda was masterminded by sage Narada.
As I have not intentionally sought it, please forgive me.”
Devasena embraced Valli and said that she understood
everything and had no grouse against either Skanda or Valli.

GRATITUDE

Looking at their friendliness, Skanda was pleased that the
auspicious moment when he was married to the duo separately was
proved to be worthy of its name.

Valli said: “Father, you made a princess art of the foundling
that I was. I shall go to my husband’s home with grateful feelings for
you and my mother, and I want you both to know that I will so

When Devasena bowed to Skanda, he did not know how to
bless her. As he uneasily kept quiet, Devasena signalled to Valli to
stand to the left of Skanda and she herself stood on his right.

146

147

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

The gods and other onlookers blessed the happy trio.

Gajasura’s heart. Hearing the news from the messengers, Parvati
prayed to Lord Vishnu for his help. He assured her that he would
bring back Lord Siva to her.

When at night the whole Silver Mountain was bright with multicoloured lights, Skanda went round the place in a golden chariot,
accompanied by his two wives. The entire populace reverentially
cheered them, standing on either side of the wide streets.

GAJASURA
As Siva and Parvati were contentedly enjoying their conjugal
bliss, the whole world likewise was happily going about its tasks
with dutiful dedication. Sacrificial rites and other holy acts were
being performed with due regularity and sincerity.
However, in the meantime, the demon, Gajasura, was born in
the clan of Tarakasura. He prayed to Brahma and received several
boons from the deity. His capital, Sonitapura was flourishing with
plenty and prosperity. And like his predecessor, he too began
pestering the ranks of gods and the sages.
Indra was determined to put an end to Gajasura and his
success. As sage Narada came to his court, singing the glory of
Gajasura’s realm, Indra was further strengthened in his determination
to punish Gajasura.
Narada also went to Sonitapura, and receiving the honours of
Gajasura, told the demon: “O demon-king, don’t you realise that
by praying to Lord Siva, you can bring Him to your side and make
yourself invincible? Lord Siva is indeed partial to His devotee, and
your prayers will be satisfactorily answered by Him.”
Accordingly Gajasura performed a severe penance, with Lord
Siva in mind, and found the favour of that god. He actually
succeeded in imprisoning Lord Siva in his heart.
When Lord Siva disappeared from the Silver Mountain, its
denizens, including Parvati and Skanda, were much perturbed.
Skanda sent the Rudra hordes in search of Siva. After a long
search they succeeded in finding out that Siva was incarcerated in

Accompanied by Brahma,Vishnu went down to Sonitapura,
in the guise of a mendicant-entertainer who goes about with a
caparisoned bull (“Gangireddu”), doing amusing tricks.
As the disguised divine duo and their fancy bull were roaming
the streets of Sonitapura, Gajasura sent his men to fetch them into
his presence.
When the false entertainers arrived at the palace gate, Gajasura
asked them to display their tricks with the bull. Brahma and Vishnu
sang the hymns in praise of Siva, and the bull was dancing to their
tune. Hearing the song and dance, the Siva embedded in Gajasura’s
heart rose up and started inflicting pain in his throat. Realising the
success of their mission, Brahma and Vishnu were delighted, as
they saw the discomfiture of Gajasura, who addressed Lord Siva
thus: “Lord, why art Thou squeezing my neck? Is it fair that Thou
shouldst be so captivated by the entertainer’s praises of Thee pining
for Parvati Devi’s company? If Thou really wantest to return to
Kailasa, take me along with Thee, for I cannot live even a second
outside of Thy presence before me or within me. Is it not to achieve
perfect communion with Thee that I hid Thee in my heart?”
Siva replied: “O demon-king, I appreciate your sincere
devotion. But my place is on Mount Kailasa and beside my consort
Parvati. Anyway, your end is fast approaching, and I have to hurry
back to my duty of taking care of the re-creation of the living world
which is annihilated in me. So make your final request and I will
honour it.”
Gajasura replied: “I will not come in the way of the process of
re-creation, not will I separate Thee from Parvati. Kindly grant me
communion with Thy supreme spirit.”

148

149

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Lord Siva granted that Gajasura could live by his side in the
form of a holy rat. Gajasura felt supremely gratified and began
chanting the sacred Mantra, “ Namah Sivaaya”. Siva came out of
him, tearing his belly. Gajasura died as a demon, was reborn as a
holy rat, anf followed Siva wherever the deity went.

to allow anyone in, without her permission. Kindly note that this is
not the opportune moment for Thee to enter this room. Please wait
for a little while, and Thou wilt have Thy wishes fulfilled.”

Mount Kailasa and its residents greeted the return of Lord
Siva with extreme satisfaction and jubilation.

GANAPATI
Parvati was having her oil-bath. To protect the door of the
bathroom against intruders, she formed a clay-idol, poured life into
it and christened it ‘Ganapati’ (Lord of the divine hosts), after
embellishing it with rich ornaments. Ganapati saluted his divine
mother, who suitably blessed him, and ordered him not to allow
anyone inside, without seeking her permission.
Ganapati duly stood guard at the door, wielding the staff which
Parvati gave him.
Meanwhile, Nandi came there to inform Parvati of Siva’s return
to Kailasa. Ganapati stopped him. Nandi inquired: “What is she
doing?”. Ganapati replied: “She is bathing”. Nandi waited for a long
a while, and impatiently requested Ganapathi to go in and tell her
about Siva’s return. Ganapati said that he too was not allowed to
go in, unless she called him. Nandi tried to enter the bathroom, but
failed in his attempt. When Nandi reported his failure to him, Lord
Siva hurried to the room of Parvati, in his eagerness to be re-united
with her after the long separation. Outside the room, he saw Ganapati,
standing guard.
Smilingly, Siva addressed Ganapati: “Sir, who are you? What
is your name? Who commissioned you to keep watch here?”.
Ganapati replied: “Lord, I am the son of Parvati Devi. My
name is Ganapati. My mother is bathing inside, and ordered me not

TEMERITY
Parvati has not yet come out of the bathroom. Nor did Ganapati
allow the impatient Siva to go in. Nonetheless, Siva’s long absence
from His beloved made Him lose His sense of proportion. Angered
by Ganapati’s refusal to His entry, He asked the former to step
aside. Ganapati was adamanat. Infuriated at this rebuff, Siva cut
Ganapati’s head into pieces with his spear. Nandi witnessed the
incident with glee.
The severed head of Ganapati spoke to Siva: “Father, how
thoughtless Thou wert! Why shouldst Thou have punished someone
who was merely fulfilling his appointed duty? Please remember that
even a deity like Thee cannot escape retribution.”
Finishing her toilet and adorning herself fully, Parvati asked her
maid to open the door. The maid saw the horrible scene and reported
about it to her mistress. Crestfallen, Parvati rushed up to her bedroom
and started sobbing inconsolably. The maid informed Siva about
Parvati’s sorrow.

REPENTANCE
By now Siva was contrite. Hurrying to the bedroom he
consoled her: “It was only my intense longing for you, darling, that
made me lose my temper. I now regret my rash act. I quite
understand the nature of mother-love that makes you so sad. Forgive
me for my folly, but rest assured that I will give back Ganapati’s
life.” So speaking, he led his consort to the outer door where
Ganapati was lying with severed head.

REBIRTH
At the sight of the dissected Ganapati, again Parvati broke
down and began to weep aloud.

150

151

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

But Siva ordered his men to bring the severed head of Gajasura
(elephant-shaped demon) and fixed it to Ganapati’s trunk. Ganapati
got up, as though from sleep, and at once bowed to his mother’s
feet. She blessed him to live long. She advised him to salute Siva,
too. For a while staring at Siva, Ganapati then fell prostrate at the
feet of the Lord. Siva embraced him and said” “You are verily the
son who conquered his father!”

Ganapati was not prepared to let go his lordship over the divine
hordes.

UPANAYANAM (Sacred-thread Ceremony)

Skanda started right away, on his peacock mount, to go round
the earth. The mountless Ganapati knew not how to compete with
his brother. Seeing their dejected son, Siva and Parvati suggested
to him that he seek Vishnu’s advice. Accordingly, Ganapati rushed
up to Vishnu and respectfully requested the deity’s help. Vishnu
said: “Just recite ‘Namah Sivaaya’ for five hundred thousand times
and go round your parents twenty-one times. That would amount
to going round the earth.”

Siva invited Brahma and other scholarly guests, and performed
the thread ceremony of Ganapati, in strict accordance with the
scriptures. Siva himself initiated Ganapati in the Gayatri Mantra.
Various guests made various gifts to Ganapati: Kundika gave
him a rosary; Parvati, several precious jewels; Vishnu, a discweapon; and the Pramatha hordes, various ornaments.
Ganapati bowed to the feet of the Trinity couples, the seven
sages and other honoured guests, and received their blessings.
Siva took Ganapati into his arms and said: “Dear son, you will
be the master of the Pramatha hordes, and the deity who will be
worshipped in the world in the first place, gaining precedence even
the Trinity in the eyes of the devotees. Since you were born on the
fourth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Bhadrapada, that
day becomes very auspicious, and they that worship you on that
day will be freed from all ills. But those people who refrain from
that worship will be beset by evil. As you are the deity who prevents
all the obstacles that come in the way of your devotees, you will be
known as “Vighnesvara” (the Lord who destroys obstacles) and
“SiddhiVinayaka” (the Lord who guarantees fulfilment).

Thereupon Skanda and Ganapati approached their parents to
decide the issue between them. Unable to reconcile the two brothers,
Siva thought up a solution to the problem. He spoke to them: “He
who between you returns first to us, after completing a round trip of
the earth, will be the lord of the divine hordes.”

Sitting behind his parents on a seat made of ‘Darbha’ grass,
Ganapati chanted the sacred Mantra as suggested by Vishnu and
also went round them twenty-one times. Then he bowed to them
humbly and told them that he completed the trip round the earth.
Later Skanda returned, after finishing his round-trip, He was
told by the pilgrims how Ganapati completed his ‘Round Trip’earlier.
Skanda, instead of being disappointed, was largehearted enough to
appreciate the wise step taken by his brother.
Siva and Parvati were satisfied with the non-acrimonious way
things turned out.
And so Ganapati was ceded the lordship over the divine hordes
(ganas).

‘RUNNING RACE’

LORDSHIP OVER ALL DIVINE HORDES

Skanda was the lord of the divine hosts. So Siva and Parvati
thought it would be fitting to entrust the lordship of the Pramatha
hordes and their likes to Ganapati. But Skanda protested, and

To anoint Ganapati as the lord of the hosts, the waters of all
the sacred rivers were fetched. He was embellished with various
jewels made up of all the precious gems. In front of all the hordes,

152

153

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Ganapati was sworn in as their Lord. The Trinity couple and the
sages blessed him and received his grateful salutations. The gods in
heaven showered flowerpetals on him.

to him that he first seek the permission of Ganapati, and said that, if
agreed to the proposal, they had no objection.

As the hordes were dancing in happy celebration of Ganapati’s
coronation, he wanted to join them. But he felt that his sacred thread
was obstructing the movement of his elephant-trunk-head- which
discomfiture of his caused good-humoured amusement to the onlookers.

SIDDHI (FRUITION) & BUDDHI (WISDOM)
Ganapati came of age. His parents thought it was about time
he married.
Visvarupa Prajapati had two lovely and clever daughters,
named Siddhi and Buddhi. Visvarupa realised that these highly
accomplished daughters of his would be worthy wives of Ganapati.
So he journeyed to mount Kailasa to make the necessary proposal
to Lord Siva.

WOULD-BE BRIDEGROOM
Visvarupa’s eyes fell on Ganapati and he was pleased with
his looks and embellishments- the short stature; the diamondstudded necklace; the golden bracelets; and anklets; silken robes;
a lotus in his left hand; the sacred ashes smeared on his forehead,
in the middle of which a vertically weapon-shaped crimson dot;
a golden ear ring on his left ear; and a golden sacred thread
across his trunk.
He was seated on a diamond-studded throne, with a golden
plate, to his right, on which were placed a glass of cow’s milk and
bunches of various kinds of sweet fruits.
Visvarupa then decided on offering the hand of his daughters
to Ganapati. Accordingly he went up to Siva and Parvati, bowed to
them and conveyed to them his intention. The divine couple suggested

When Visvarupa approached Ganapati with his proposal, the
latter said: “I am honoured by your proposal. But don’t you think
that the girls and I must take a look at one another before we come
to a final decision? Therefore It shall come all alone to your home.
When the girls and I are pleased with one another, you can proceed
with the wedding arrangements.”
Visvarupa escorted Ganapati to his residence. Delighted with
the hospitality accorded to him, Ganapi started performing a
rapturous dance. When the two girls saw him and bowed to his
feet, he could discover signs of acceptance in their features. He
then blessed them, to the effect that their wishes be fulfilled of getting
soon married.
Visvarupa and his two daughters were gladdened.

WEDDING
Visvarupa spoke to Ganapati: “Lord, by your arrival my home
was sanctified and our lives are blessed. Just as Indra and Pulinda
were each sanctified by offering Devasena and Valli respectively to
Skanda, so am I honoured by your accepting my two daughters as
your lifemates. Now take the hands of my daughters into yours.”
Ganapati beckoned the girls towards him. Then Siddhi stood
on his right, and Buddhi on his left.
Later Siddhi took Ganapati’s right hand, and Buddhi took his
left hand, as they led him to the shrine of Siva and Parvati, where
they were greeted with temple honours by the priest.’
Ringing the temple bell the two brides and the bridegroom
prayed to the divine couple, who aptly blessed them.
Meanwhile the Trinity and their spouses arrived there at the
invitation of Visvarupa. At the behest of Siva, Brahma presided

154

Siva Puranam

over the wedding ceremony and conducted the proceedings
according to scriptural tradition.
The newly-wed were showered with rich gifts by the honoured
guests.

JOURNEY TO KAILASA
Next morning Ganapati left Kailasa, accompanied by his two
consorts.
When they reached their destination, the Pramatha and Rudra
hordes stood on either side of the streets to shout welcoming
slogans. Skanda greeted them, along with his wives, Devasena and
Valli. The wives of Skanda kissed the cheeks of the wives of
Ganapati, as a sign of good will.
The sound of the bugles, and the shouts of the citizens hailing
“Long live Ganapati, Siddhi and Buddhi!”, were resound on all sides.
Skanda escorted the newly-wed to the presence of Lord Siva.
As He was waiting at the threshold of His castle side, to receive
them the divine couple blessed them duly, as Ganapati and his
consorts touched their feet in reverential salutation.
Jaya and Vijaya offered the newly-wed ‘Aarati’, and led them
into the interior of the palace.
Siva honoured the male guests, and Parvati, the lady guests,
with appropriate gifts.
Narada and Tumbura sang melodiously, and the Apsaras
danced delectably, in honour of the newly married.
Siva and Parvati were pleased that their two sons were well
married.
All the divine couples were spending their time in well-ordered
pleasures and doing their best for the benefit of mankind, through
precept and example.

***

SIVA PURAANAM
PART II
KILLING OF TRIPURAASURAS
Tarakasura has three sons: Tarakaksha, Kamalaksha,
Vidyunmali. After the death of Tarakasura, his wife took these
children down to the nether world and brought them up with great
care. The teacher of the demonic race, Sukracharya, taught them
all the important arts and sciences.
When they grew up the three brothers went up to mount Meru
and worshipped Brahma, who was pleased with their devotion and
offered them any favour they sought of him.
The brothers said: “Lord, let our death be at the hands of only
such a hero as can wield ride a chariot which is not a chariot, and
wield a bow and an arrow which is neither. Besides, grant us that
we remain ever prosperous and ever devoted to Lord Siva and that
we can variously live in the cities built of gold, silver and magnet.”
Accordingly Brahma ordered the divine architect, Visvakarma,
to build the three cities (tri-pura), as requested by the brothers.
Tarakaksha was ceded the city of gold; Kamalaksha, that of
silver; and Vidyunmali, that of magnet.
The three brothers knew that the cause of their father’s death
was the enmity of the gods. Their mother’s instruction in that
connection furthered their grudge against the gods. So they began
persecuting the ranks of the gods, who, thereupon, went up to Lord
Vishnu, accompanied by Brahma, and sought His succour.
Vishnu told them: “The Tripuraasuras are great devotees of
Lord Siva. I will suggest to you a method through which you can
see that the power of their penance decreases. Go and preach
atheism. By coming under its influence the wisdom and the sense of

156

157

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

devotion among the demonic races will diminish. Then their misdeeds
will increase and they will be courting their own disaster, because of
their sins.

The dying brothers appealed to Siva: “Lord, forgive our foolish
deeds. It is our good fortune that we should die at your hands. We
will be now united with your spirit. Our last wish is that you grant us
no rebirth. We see our father securely embedded in your heart.
Please set us by his side.”

Later, in the halls of the demons the atheists preached: “O
citizens, in the process of creation there is no question of
predestination or righteous action. The relationships among the
creatures and the differences of the sexes are all false, having nothing
to do with a divine creator. The Trinity of gods are creatures like
ourselves and are in no way superior to us. It was only self-seeking
scribes who postulated the theories of vice and virtue, and called
them ‘codes’ (Saastras). Do not believe in them. There is neither
god nor a rebirth. Just enjoy yourselves as you please, for there is
neither heaven nor hell, and this life alone is real.”

Siva accepted them and allowed them into his spiritual heart.

JALANDHARA
Hiranyakasipu’s son, Agnijihva, had son named Sukara. By
worshipping Brahma he obtained the boon of being invincible against
any demon or serpent or god or human being or weapon. Building
himself a mighty capital in the seabed, he started persecuting the three
worlds.

The three sons of Taraka were immediately influenced by the
tenets of atheism. They and their followers began relinquishing all
good deeds and prescribed duties. Consequently the powers of the
boons granted to them were evaporating like the dew in the morning
sun.

This Sukara is the same as Jalandhara. Even hungry babies
would be frightened out of suckling, if they heard his name. He
destroyed all the sacrifical altars and was molesting the wives of the
sages. The helpless wails of those women were extremely bothering
the Trinity of gods.

Realising that the opportune moment has come, Brahma, Vishnu
and the gods went to meet Lord Siva at Kailasa and to report to
Him the happenings engineered by the demons.

Not content with his misdeeds elsewhere, Jalandhara,
accompanied by his army, went up to Kailasa, to challenge Lord
Siva for a fight. Since he did not want to negate the boon granted
by Brahma, Siva disappeared, leaving behind even his constant
companion and consort, Parvati.

Lord Siva is omniscient. He was quite willing to destroy not
only the three cities but all the three brothers. At his suggestion,
Vishnu made of his consort, Mother Earth, a chariot; of the sun and
the moon, the two wheels of the chariot; of the Vedas, horses; of
Brahma, the charioteer; of the mount Meru, the bow; of the divine
serpent, Sesha, the bowstring; and of himself, the Narayana arrow.
Then he requested Siva to ascend the chariot and cast the ‘Narayana
Astra’ at the Three Cities and their rulers, in order to destroy both
the places and the persons at one stroke.
Lord Siva did so, and that was the end of the Tripura cities
and brothers, as the weapon made a sacrifice of them to the FireGod.

Unable to find Siva, Jalandhara went to Vaikuntha and pressed
Vishnu to fight with him. Vishnu followed the example of Siva, for
the same reason.
Under the impression that he frightened even Siva and Vishnu,
Jalandhara returned to his kingdom, like a conquering hero.
Unable to find their husbands, Parvati and Lakshmi were
painfully restless.
Siva and Vishnu went down to Lake Manasasarovar, and there
began praying to Paraa Sakti; the Supreme Mother was impressed

158

159

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

by their worship and, appearing before them, advised them to
exchange their weapons in order to kill Jalandhara.

me. Still, I do not want to flee from the battleground. Just grant that
I will be accorded Salvation, for I now regret my misdeeds and
agree that the tears of the wives of the sages are now virtually burning
me. Please receive my last salutations”.

As Siva took Vishnu’s Disc-weapon, and Vishnu received
Siva’s Trident, sage Narada approached them and said: “Sirs, what
is the reason behind your coming here leaving behind your homes
and wives, and now exchanging your weapons? If you are
preoccupied with saving yourselves, from the onslaught of
Jalandhara, what happens to the rest of the universe? Is it not your
destined duty that you should protect the helpless virtuous beings
and punish the vicious people?”

Siva and Vishnu then regained their respective weapon, which
came back to each of them in the rightful manner after fulfilling the
task of killing Jalandhara.
The gods and the sages praised the two deities, who were
lovingly received by their consorts, when they returned to their
respective abode.

So inciting the two deities, Narada went down to Jalandhara’s
realm and, receiving his hospitality, spoke to him: “Jalandhara, your
valour is matchless. Siva and Vishnu are hiding at Lake
Manasasarovar and are plotting against you. If you do not manage
to separate them, you will be courting disaster.”

The demon-king Bali had a son named Banasura. He had a
thousand arms. He conquered all the three worlds. He was ruling
the entire universe, making Sonapura his capital.

Jalandhara left for Lake Manasasarovar and told the two
deities: “Sirs, I pity you, because you ran away like cowards from
your own abodes. Don’t you know that a real hero cares little for
his life? If you want to prove yourselves, come and fight with me.”

As the court orchestra struck the music, he danced with
supreme skill in favour of Lord Siva. Siva was pleased with his
dance and asked him to seek a favour. The demon requested the
deity that the latter stand guard at the gate of his fort. Siva agreed.

Siva and Vishnu were amused at Jalandhara’s ignorance and
vanity, revealed to him the real reason for their self-imposed exile,
and added: “You must stop pestering the wives of the sages.
Otherwise your sins will destroy you. Go to Vaikuntha or Kailasa
and try to rule those kingdoms, if you like.”

Before taking up his duty, Siva went back to Kailasa and
reported to Parvati what happened. She was grieved at her lord’s
thoughtless mercy. Seeing her giref, Siva agreed to take her along
with Him to Sonapura. When the divine couple left the place, mount
Kailasa lost all its splendour.

Jalandhara replied: “Stop this roundabout backchat. If you are
genuine heroes, come and fight with me. You cannot escape me,
anyway now.” So speaking he flung all his mighty weapons against
the two gods.

Oh, is it not the irony of fate that one of the Trinity of gods
should be the gatekeeper of a demon-king?

Siva aimed the Disc at Jalandhara, and Vishnu attacked him
with the Trident. Jalandhara was unable to withstand the force of
that attack. He cried: “Sirs, the weapons you flung at me are torturing

Banasura had a daughter, called Usha, whose beauty could
not be matched even by that of the celestial courtesans. Besides,
she was accomplished in the arts of music, dance and literature.

BANASURA

PRINCESS USHA

160

161

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

One day, after she came of age, she went into the forest,
accompanied by her maids. The forest-goddess bade her welcome.
The flora and fauna appeared to put on a new grace at the sight of
her. The swans in the lake moved more delightfully and the peacocks
danced more scintillatingly, as they saw the princess.

The maids realised that the princess was dreaming aloud, did
everything in their power to quieten her, and then woke her up. As Usha
opened her eyes she could no longer see her ‘dream-boy’. Consequently,
she dropped tears of dejection from her eyes.

Usha began swimming in the lake, along with her friends. For
the fun of it she assumed the form of Parvati. The maids also put on
strange garbs. They all went to visit the Siva temple in the nearby
pleasure garden, after finishing their swim. Usha fell prostrate at the
feet of the images of Siva and Parvati. Pleased with the princess,
Parvati revealed herself and said: “Child, how you should love me
that you took on my shape and took me in for a while! I want to
grant you a boon. Fast on the twelfth day of the bright fortnight of
Chaitra. In the night you will see a handsome youth, who will be
your husband and will make you immensely happy.”
The princess thanked the goddess suitably and returned to the
palace, along with her maids.

CHITRA REKHA
As Usha was drying her eyes with the hem of her saree, one of
the maids, Chitra Rekha, said: “Dear princess, have you seen your
prince-charming in your dream? Are you afraid you may not see
him again? But have you ascertained his whereabouts? If so, tell
me, and I will go and fetch him to you!”
Usha replied: “You don’t seem to realise how clever that
stranger is? He seems to be adept in the art of love. He simply
bewitched me by his good looks. I was so swept off my feet that I
could not think of asking me who he was or where he lived. I am
sure goddess Parvati’s forecast will not fail. Still, I wish you could
go and find him, for you alone are capable of doing so.”

The twelfth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Chaitra
dawned eventually.

The Chitra Rekha, the eldest and wisest of her maids, told
Usha: “Dear princess, why this needless anxiety? Anyway, I shall
paint the pictures of all the handsome princes in the three worlds.
Point out to me the one who took your fancy, and I will bring him to
you.”

As foretold by Parvati, Usha saw an extremely handsome youth
in her dreams at midnight. She cried aloud to her maids: “There, can’t
you see the incarnation of Cupid - he who resembles a dark cloud in
hue, with his black hair and complexion; he who is resplendent with his
gem-studded crow, broad forehead, wide eyes, ornamented ears and
neck; he who is silk-clad; he who is stealing sidelong glances at mewho is stealing my heart? Now please get me pure water, fragrant
flowers, delicious fruits, and sweet milk- so that I can serve my lord to
my heart’s content. Indeed goddess Parvati’s words have come true
and my would-be husband has come to me!”

After rejecting many pictures and expressing a wish to go to
the pleasure-garden to see if the prince was hiding there, at last
Usha was shown a picture that convinced her that it was the one
she found in her dream. Seeing the true painting, she bent her head
bashfully. A little later she addressed Chitra Rekha: “Chitra, you
lived up to your name (which means a ‘picture’). I want to reward
you suitably.” So speaking, she kissed the cheek of Chitra Rekha.
When chitra asked her : “Is this really the stranger whom you love?”,
Usha hid her face in her veil and nodded her head. At last she once
again requested her friend to go and bring him to her.

Thus several days passed by.

DREAM-BOY

162

163

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

ANIRUDDHA

LORD KRISHNA AND SATYABHAMA

Then Chitra Rekha told Usha: “Princess, this stranger is no
ordinary mortal. He is the son of Rati and Manmatha. He lives in
Dvaraka. His name is Aniruddha. He is the grandson of Lord
Krishna; a mighty hero; and an extremely handsome prince. Verily
it is the grace of goddess Parvati that enabled you to find this
charming prince in your dream. Now let us see how you will actually
become his life-partner in real life!”

Chitrarekha entered the loftiest palace in Dvaraka. The interior
was dazzlingly beautiful with the vari-coloured bright lights, and from
the bedroom were wafted the winds carrying the perfume of musk.
Inside she could see large mirrors on all the four walls, and on a
huge table golden vessels containing cow’s milk and golden plates
filled with a variety of delicacies.

Usha then urged her to go to Dvaraka immediately and bring
the prince to her, threatening that otherwise she would put an end to
her life.

DVARAKA
Chitra Rekha set off to the city Dvaraka, with a prayer on her
lips to Mother Sakti.
The divine Mother responded through an aerial voice: “Chitra,
Mother Sakti is pleased with you. She granted you the ability to
enter the bedroom of Aniruddha and carry him along with his bed
to the bedroom of Usha.”
Encouraged by these words, Chitra left for the city fo Dvaraka
with redoubled hope. She was delighted to see that hallowed town,
where she could see the splendid castle of Lord Krishna himself,
next to which was situated that of his brother, Balarama. She guessed
that in as much as Aniruddha was the favourite of the Lord, his
abode would be on the other side of Krishna’s.
Then her gaze fell on the large sheds wherein the holy cows
were being well nourished by the cowherds; on the fond lovers
going to meet each other in the bright moonlight; on the lilies in the
lakes which were blooming at the sight of the moon.
She decided on first paying her reverential respects to Lord
Krishna, before going to meet Aniruddha.

And on the bed of soft eiderdown she could see the lovely
epitome of the highest feminine grace and virtue. She could guess
that the lady was Satyabhama. Realising that they were resting after
a deliciously wild love-play, she longed for the day when she too
would be able to enjoy the caresses of her future husband.
She then began to describe to herself the divine grace and the
ethereal beauty of Satyabhama. She bowed to the feet of the blessed
couple and mentally prayed for their blessings for the success of her
mission.
Then she entered the palace next to that of Lord Krishna,
wherein she directly witnessed the sleeping Aniruddha, who looked
like an incarnation of Cupid.

DREAM GIRL
At the moment of her entry, Aniruddha was dreaming about
Usha and speaking aloud in his sleep: “O precious beauty, I am
spellbound by the power of your good looks. I have discovered the
meaning of your sidelong glances. You are mine and I am yours. I
am looking forward to the moment when I can touch your hand.
What are you hesitating for? There is none hereabouts. Come and
meet me. All the riches of man and nature are in plenty here. You
will not find even the least little desire of yours unfulfilled in my
home or town. Let us now be united in mind and body and soul.”
Chitrarekha no longer hesitated. She lifted him and his bed,
through the mysterious powers accorded to her by Mother Sakti,
and took him to Usha rightaway.

164

165

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

The highly gratified Usha presented her with a necklace studded
with all the nine kinds of gems.

She then led him to another room where he had to make his
abode incognito.

As Usha was awaiting his pleasure, Aniruddha woke up and
before his eyes he saw the very girl he dreamt about. As he looked
around the bedroom of Usha, he could understand that he was not
in his own room. He asked Usha: “Princess, may I know who you
are? Tell me the secret of my being here.”

But still the spies managed to learn about Aniruddha’s arrival
and informed Banasura about the fact. Bana ordered his men to kill
him, because the demon-king was a devotee of Lord Siva and could
not relish the idea of a protege of Lord Vishnu for his son-in-law.

Usha said “I am the daughter of Banasura. This is Sonapura,
the capital of his kingdom. My name is Usha.”
Aniruddha then told her about his dream of the previous night.
Usha informed him about her own dream and about how
Mother Sakti helped in bringing them together. She also introduced
Chitrarekha to him and said that it was this maid of her’s that was
instrumental in factualising the theoretical boon of the divine Mother.
Then she took Aniruddha to the bathroom where she provided him
with the choicest bathing material. When he finished his bath, she
decorated him with the richest raiment and with the most precious
jewels.
Chitrarekha then served the couple with sumptuous food and
drink, and went away leaving them alone.

The soldiers of Bana flung several of their wild weapons at
Aniruddha, who repulsed them through his ‘Parigha’ weapon and
actually killed them all.
Bana, learning the news of his men’s defeat and of the love
between Usha and Aniruddha, thought to himself: “How strange
that a human being could win the love of a princess of the demonic
race! One knows of the many former instances when our people
married the human beings, but this is the first time it happened the
other way about. This is a crime that cannot be pardoned. I have
also to punish Usha’s maids who must have misled her.”

BATTLE
So deciding, Banasura took along with him the army of
Vrishandu and went to attack Aniruddha.

Aniruddha expressed his admiration for the elegant artfulness
with which her bedroom is decorated, and also for the artistic skill
of Chitrarekha who painted the pictures on the wall. He jokingly
asked her whether it was she herself or her parents that sent for
him.

Aniruddha hit Bana with a fierce arrow, as a result of which
the latter disappeared into the sky. After hitting Bana, the arrow
killed a number of his soldiers nearby. Vrishaandu was amazed at
the skill of Aniruddha. Learning about the fight, Usha was much
perturbed. She was surprised that her father should have acted
against her will; nor could she appreciate the fact that her father
was working on Aniruddha the animosity he has against Vishnu. But
she could not venture to stop her father who was unjustly trying to
separate her from her lover.

Usha replied that it was the will of God and the grace of the
Mother that united them.

Reappearing on the scene, Bana was steadfastly aiming his
arrows at Aniruddha. Aniruddha easily repulsed the demonking’s

Usha and Aniruddha were feeding each other with loving
tenderness.

166

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

attack. At last when Bana was trying to cut the head of Aniruddha
with his sword, Vrishaandu stopped him and suggested that he would
imprison Aniruddha instead.

BATTLE BETWEEN SIVA AND VISHNU

At that juncture an aerial voice was heard saying: “Bana, you
are a thoughtless person. Aniruddha is actually a devotee of Lord
Siva. You must beware of the sin of separating true lovers. Be patient
till your flagmast is struck off. Then your vanity will vanish.”
Bana was bewildered. He arrested Aniruddha by means of
‘serepent-weapon-bonds’(Naga pasa) and retired to his palace thereafter.
Here the worried Usha prayed Siva and Parvati for help.
Aniruddha also begged Parvati to come to his rescue. She took
pity on him and kicked the ‘serpent-bonds’ with her left foot. As he
was freed from his bonds, she exercised a counterbalancing Yogic
power and effected his transfer to the bedroom of Usha, from the
prison. The reunited lovers thanked the divine mother reverentially.
There at Dvaraka the disappearance of Aniruda caused great
concern to his parents. Krishna was also sorry to hear the wails of
Aniruddha’s wives. Learning the news of Aniruddha’s whereabouts
from Narada, Krishna set off for Sonipura on his Garuda mount,
accompanied by his brothers and cousins.
When they arrived at their destination, Krishna was surprised
to see Siva and Parvati keeping watch over the gates of Sonipura.
Siva and Parvati ordered the Pramatha hordes to be prepared
for any eventually.
Krishna was laughing within himself, at the thought of any fight
with the divine couple who already protected Aniruddha. Krishna
expressed his gratitude to them for that good deed of theirs. Siva
and Parvati were, for their part, unhappy at the need to fight with
Lord Krishna. But it is the ordained duty of Krishna to kill Bana,
whereas Siva had to rescue the demon who was his devotee.

167

So Siva and Krishna (incarnation of Vishnu) had no choice out
to fight on behalf of, and against, Bana, respectively.
Krishna releaved the ‘disease’ emanating from the Vaishnava
power; Siva sent up the ‘disease’extracted from the Siva energy. And
the two disease-causing forces began battling with each other in the
celestial region.
The celestial denizens who witnessed that fierce duel were
frightened and begged the two deities: “O Lord Siva, O Lord Vishnu,
please be reconiciled to each other and give up this battle. otherwise
the whole universe will soon be exterminated. You whose duty is to
save the world, must you indulge in an activity detrimental to the
whole world?”
This appeal was followed by Bana’s apology to Vishnu.
Consequently Siva and Krishna stopped their fighting.
Siva and Parvati instructed Bana to make necessary
arrangements for the wedding of Usha and Aniruddha.

WEDDING OF USHA AND ANIRUDDHA
Bana again begged Siva and Vishnu for forgiveness of his folly
and requested them to stay on for the wedding and to bless the
young couple. They agreed.
The wedding of Usha and Aniruddha was performed in superb
style. The entire city of Sonita shone with the brilliance of the artificial
lights and the citizens went wild with the merriment befitting the
occasion.
Siva and Parvati and other honoured guests gave and received
rich gifts, and returned home after blessing the newly-weds.
Krishna took Usha and Aniruddha to Dvaraka.

168

Siva Puranam

Rukmini and Satya fulfilled the formalities of cermemonial
welcome to the young couple, and the entire inhabitants turned out
to greet them with joy and congratulations.
Bana felt that his life’s mission was fulfilled by his daughter is
becoming the daughter-in-law of Manmatha.

NANDISVARA
Sage Salankayana had a worthy wise son, named Silada. But
Silada himself had no children. As he was praying to Lord Siva, his
body was covered by anthills. The worms preyed upon his blood
and flesh, and he became much emaciated. Pleased with his rigorous
penance, Siva appeared before him, and touched his forehead,
whereby Silada regained his fully healthy body. On being asked to
seek the boon he wanted, Silada said: “Lord, my craving is for a
son who is not born of woman, who will be well-versed in the
scriptures, and who will live long in dedicated devotion to Thee.”
Siva said ‘so be it’, and disappeared.
Silada went home and began digging the ground to prepare
an altar for the sacrificial fire. When the sacrificial fireplace was
ready, from within it appeared a supremely lovely infant. Silada
immediately took him into his arms and caressed him, and
thanked Lord Siva for the ready manifestation of His boon. Then
he took that superbly resplendent child to his wife. Seeing the
lady, the infant smiled at her knowingly and stretched his arms
towards her. She was extremely delighted at this gesture of the
baby, and rightaway carried him in her arms to the cradle and
put him to sleep, after mysteriously finding herself suckling him.
The next day Silada and his wife performed the christening
ceremony of the child. The priests and the guests blessed the child
that he should grow into a wise Vedic scholar. Then an aerial voice
was heard: “O sage Silada, name this child of yours as ‘Nandi’.
Thereby your fame will increase.”

Siva Puranam

169

Silada gladly did so.
When Nandi was five years old he was sent to the Gurukul
(school in the hermitage), where he learnt everything worth learning,
after being taught only once by the teacher.
As Nandi was celebrating his Sacred week of initiation, sage
Mitravaruna came to the hermitage of Silada. After receiving
Silada’s hospitality, Mitravaruna was introduced to Nandi. The
guest was extremely pleased with the personal grace and the
scholarliness of Nandi. Nandi bowed to the feet of Mitravaruna
and expressed his gratitude.
Then Mitravaruna read the palm of Nandi and told Silada that
the boy was indeed a genius but that he might not live long. Silada
was crestfallen.
But Nandi spoke to his father: “Sir, you are needlessly worried.
Why should you think that Siva’s boon will be set at naught by the
God of Death? Hasn’t the Lord assured long life to me?”
After thus consoling his father, Nandi went to the forest to
perform a great penance. Pleased with his penance, Siva, along
with His consort, appeared before him and placed His hand on the
boy’s head by way of promising him fearlessness (Abhaya-hasta).
At the touch of the Lord’s hand, Nandi stirred out of his deep
meditation. Opening his eyes, he saw the divine couple and fell
prostrate at their feet, and begged them that be allowed to stay with
them always.
Siva told him: “Good boy, I am very much impressed by your
devotion. From now on you are assured of longevity. We also invite
you to stay with us for ever.”
Parvati placed a lotus garland around Nandi’s neck. Siva
sprinkled a drop of water from the river Ganga in his braid, by
way of holy anointment. The water so sprinkled has formed itself

170

171

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

into five branches of river: Trisrota, Jatodaka, Svarnodaka, Jambu
and Vrishadhvani. It is reputed that those who take a dip in them
would be delivered from their sins.

tissue (Medas), named ‘Ajnaana’ (Ignorance), and flung it away.
The place where that Medas was thrown is called ‘Brahma
Kapalam’. Siva was now pacified. He addressed Bhairava:
“Hereafter you will be known as ‘Kaala Bhairava’. Since you were
born in my presence, you will always remain by my side, as my
bodyguard.”

Siva took Nandi to Kailasa and made him commander of some
of his horces.
The Marut-gods brought one of their daughters, Sukirti, to
Siva’s abode and requested Him to accept on behalf of Nandi
her hand in marriage. Complying with their request, Siva and
Parvati first performed Nandi’s Upanayanam, in strict accordance
with the scriptural instruction, and then celebrated the wedding
of Sukirti and Nandi.
Siva told Nandi: “You and your parents can live in comfort in
my dwelling. From today onwards you will be my constant
companion and adviser, and accompany me wherever I go.”
Verily how fortunate is Nandi to receive such a favour from
Lord Siva!

KALA BHAIRAVA
Provoked by his self-importance, Brahma declared: “I am the
Creator. I am the first of the Trinity. All must worship me, therefore,
first of all.”
Hearing these vain words of Brahma, Vishnu and Siva called
upon the Vedas to inform them about who is the First of the
Trinity. The Vedas said that Siva was the First. Still, Brahma
maintained that the opinion of the Vedas was wrong. Vishnu kept
quiet. Siva was angered and uttered a cry of defiance, ‘Hum’.
Then a three-eyed ferocious form of his Rudra facet, designated
as Bhairava, rose from that cry, and, wielding his Trident, beating
his drum and dancing the cosmic dance, began shaking up the
earth and the sky.
The Bhairava emanation then bowed to the feet of his original
progenitor, Siva. Then he drew out from Brahma’s head the cortical

By now Brahma’s vanity vanished. He apologised to Siva. Siva
forgave him. Siva and Vishnu retired to their homes.
Back home, Siva told Bhairava: “You were guilty of killing (a
part of ) Brahma. The sin that accrues to you because of that act
will always stick to you. The place where you cut off Brahma’s
cortical tissue will be known as Varanasi (Kasi): it will be the greatest
pilgrim centre in the world. First take a dip in all the holy rivers, visit
all the places of pilgrimage, and then perform the ‘Kapalika’ (related
to the skull) worship, before you settle down at Kaasi. Thereby
your sin of killing (a part of ) Brahma will be washed away. Later,
being the lord of the holy city of Kaasi, you will be serving me for
ever.”
As Kala Bhairava started on his pilgrimage, Vishnu told Narada:
“Kalabhairava is going round the world, performing the Kapalika
worship. Go and boardcast to the world not to offer him alms
wherever he goes.”
Narada literally followed Vishnu’s instruction.
As none was offering him food, at last KalaBhairava went up
to Vishnu and sought his help. Then Vishnu suggested that he would
step into the temple of Visvesvara, as soon as he entered Kasi for
thereby his sins would be gone.
As he did so, not only was Kala Bhairava freed from his
sins, but he also gained a handsome form and became the lord of
the sacred city of Kaasi.

172

173

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

(All the devotees who anoint with oil the image of Kaala
Bhairava on the ‘Sani Trayodasi’ day will be delivered from all evil
and will enjoy great prosperity).

The demoness Simhika had a son named Raahu. He found out
Vishnu’s ruse of denying the ambrosia to the demons.

INCARNATION OF SARABHA
Even after killing Hiranyakasipu, the anger of Narasimha
(incarnation of Man-Lion) was not quenched.
At Siva’s instance, Virabhadra assumed a gigantic bird’s form,
with four faces, two feet, two wings, and ferocious claws and
eyes, and stood threateningly before Lord Narasimha. The gods
requested both of them to become peaceful and be reconciled.
Both Virabhadra, who assumed that guise of Sarabha, and Vishnu,
as the incarnation of Narasimha, acceded to the request of the gods.
Then Sarabha, reassuming his original form of Virabhadra,
bowed to the feet of Vishnu and Lakshmi, who blessed him.
Everyone was happy.

YAKSHESVARA
Lord Vishnu ordered the gods and the demons to churn the
Milky Sea. As they did so, first the poisonous fire of Halahala arose
from the sea. By imbibing it, Lord Siva saved the world from the
holocaust. Since he deposited the flaming poison (garala) in his throat
(Kantha), he is also known as ‘Garalakantha’.
Later goddess Lakshmi came out of the churned Milky Sea.
Lord Vishnu married her.
Indra took possession of the divine elephant (Airavata), the
divine horse (Ucchaisravas), the all-yielding Cow (Kama-dhenu)
and the all-giving Tree (Kalpa-Vriksha).
Lord Vishnu received the vessel of Nectar that came out of
the churning and, craftily assuming the form of the enchantress,
Mohini, deceived the demons, and distributed it among the gods,
who, thereby became immortal.

Thereupon he assumed the shape of gods and sat among
them. As he stretched his palm and received the nectar, the sun
and the moon discovered who he really was and alerted Vishnu
(Mohini) about the fact. Vishnu flung his disc at Rahu; although his
head and trunk were separated thereby, he did not die, because
of the ambrosia he already drank up. Noticing that fact, Vishnu
attached his head to his feet, and allowed him to be one of the
planets now bearing his name.
The demons were offended by the ill-treatment received by
one of their kin, and began attacking the gods. Still, because of the
ambrosia they imbibed, the gods won the fight. The demons took
to their heels, leaving behind them their dead.
The gods thought that the victory was due to their own valour
and were becoming vain glorious about it, as they returned to their
celestial abode. One day Siva, in the guise of a Yaksha, went to the
court of Indra, and asked about the reason for the vain prattling of
the gods.
The gods said: “Sir, you seem to be an ignoramus. We have
taken possession of all the good things that came out of the churning
of the Milk-Sea. We have become invincible by virtue of our
drinking the nectar, as we proved in our fight with the demons.
That is why we are expressing ourselves in this manner, by way of
self-congratulation.”
Then Siva threw down on to the floor a piece of grass and
asked them to lift it. Unable to do so, the gods bent their heads in
shame. Then an aerial voice said: “O gods, know this Yaksha to be
verily Lord Siva. Without His grace you could not lift even a piece
of grass. How could you say that it was your valour that brought
you victory? Accept the fact that you are at the mercy of Lord Siva,
and then you will continue to receive His grace.”

174

175

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

As they followed the aerial voice’s advice, Siva was pleased
with them.

Here the wife of Dadhichi lamented: “O cruel Indra, how dare
you sacrifice my husband’s life for your personal ends? Do you
want to see the end of our clan? I am with child, and if I were to join
my husband on the funeral pyre, as it behoves a pious wife, would
it not mean that Dadhichi has none to perpetuate his lineage? How
can I live without my husband, even if I do not burn myself along
with him?”

PIPPALAADA
The wife of Dadhichi, Suvarcha, is virtuous and highly
accomplished. She was entirely devoted to her husband, and would
never be out of his presence, because she wanted to be ever
prepared to attend to his needs. Both husband and wife were
devotees of Lord Siva.
When Indra complained to Brahma about the trouble he is
being subjected to by the demon, Vritra, Brahma said: “Sage
Dadhichi, praying to Siva, obtained the boon which made his bones
as hard as diamonds. Go please Dadhichi, and obtain from him one
of his bones. With that bone you can make your diamond-weapon,
which will enable you to kill the demon.”
Accordingly, Indra went to the hermitage of Dadhichi, where
the sage was reciting the sacred mantra, ‘Namah Sivaaya’. Indra
bowed to the sage, and on being asked about the reason of his visit,
told him the facts.
Dadhichi then said: “Indra, this is my hermitage. These are my
‘weapons’. All that is left is my body. Ask of me any of these things
and you will have it.”
When Indra asked for the bones of the sage, the latter gladly
yielded them to the lord of the gods, and then became united with
the sun-god, as his life went out piercing his brain.
Indra took the bones to his court, and after anointing them
with the milk of Kamadhenu, commissioned Visvakarma to make
the diamond-weapon with the backbone. The divine architect
did so and offered to Indra the Vajra-ayudha (Diamondweapon).
With the rest of Dadhichi’s bony remains and sinews, the god
of Death, Yama, got his ‘rope of death’ manufactured.

The gods were uneasy about the repercussions of this pious
lady’s calamity.
Meanwhile an aerial voice said: “O Suvarchaa, the sacred
law decrees that pregnant women should not follow their dead
husbands to the funeral pyre (to commit ‘Sati’). Rest assured that
your offspring will shine with divine splendour”.
Suvarcha was partly pacified by this assurance, but she still
thought it was right to join her husband in death. So with a hard
rock she broke up her womb, drew out the fetus and placed it
under a ‘Ravi’ tree. As she was awaiting the result of her action,
from that fetus evolved a resplendent boy. Her heart thrilled with
ecstasy. Addressing the newborn, she said: “Darling child, your
parents had not the good fortune to bring you up. But you will enjoy
longevity. You remain under this ‘Ravi’, offering all riches to the
people who pray to you.”
So speaking, she ascended the funeral pyre, placing the
responsibility of protecting her child in the hands of God.
The fame of Suvarcha(la) has gained eternal recongnition,
by virtue of the great self-sacrifice of hers.
The child was named ‘Pippalada’ by the gods. When he came
of age he married a girl named Padma. The happy couple lived
happily together, blessing all their devotees with due recognition of
their devotion.

176

177

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Pippalada’s disembodied spirit entered the ‘Raavi’ tree, and
ever since has been showering peace and prosperity on all those
who prayed to it. Thus the ‘Raavi’ tree gained a pre-eminent place
among the trees.

to protect him, Aahuka got up, took up his bow and arrows, and
went out to fight with the tigress. The tigress tore him up and killed
him.

AHUKA
In a forest near the Silver Mountain, a tribal, by name Ahuka,
was dwelling. His wife was named Ahuki.
Ahuka was in the habit of getting up early in the morning and
praying to Siva and Parvati, after the ablution. Then he would go a
hunting, and bring home venison and the like needed for his and his
wife’s sustenance. His wife was a chaste lady, entirely devoted to
her husband. She serves the guests with exemplary hospitality, and
only after attending to the needs of the guests do the couple eat
their own meal.
One day Siva told Parvati: “I want to test this tribal (Bhil)
couple. You transform yourself into a tigress and kill Ahuka. Then I
will come there as a stranger-guest and would put the Bhil couple
to a severe test.”
Accordingly they went to the Bhil dwelling. Siva, as the
stranger, after receiving the hospitality of the Bhil couple, told
Ahuka: “O Bhil, I want to spend the night in your home, because
I am afraid of the wild animals in the jungle.”
The Bhill home is a tiny one which can accomodate only two
people. But Ahuki said: “Dear husband, we cannot refuse the request
of a guest. So you two sleep inside the home. I shall stay outside,
keeping watch over you, with my bow and arrow.”
But in the third quarter of the night, she could not keep herself
awake and dozed off.
Then there appeared a tigress, roaring ferociously. The guest
pretended to be asleep, even though he heard the roaring. In order

Early next morning Ahuki woke up and saw her dead husband.
She also saw that the guest was unhurt.
The aggrieved Ahuki then spoke to the guest: “Sir, my husband
was killed. My place is with him, and so permit me to join him on
the funeral pyre.”
Preparing the fire, she addressed the Fire-God: “O lord of
Fire, I cannot bear to live without my husband. Eat me up along
with my dead husband.”
When she jumped into the fire, it became cool.
Then Siva and Parvati presented themselves before her, and
said: “O noble, chaste lady, we merely wanted to test your devotional
spirit. Both of you proved yourselves to be exemplary devotees.
Now receive your husband, who will just now come back to life.”
Ahuka got up as though from sleep. The couple then bowed
to Siva and Parvati, and sang their praises.
Siva told Ahuka: “You will become the famous son of the
king of Ayodhya, Virasena, and will be known as Nala. Your wife
will be Damayanti, the daughter of Bhimasena, king of Vidarbha:
she will choose you from among the assembled suitors in the
process of ‘Svayamvara’ (wherein the bride garlands the man she
loves in an assembly of many men who seek her hand). We will
assume the forms of a royal swan couple and assist you in your
courtship”.
So saying, Siva and Parvati disappeared.
In course of time Siva’s boon came true, and the Bhil couple
became the famous Nala and Damayanti, who lived happily together,
thanks to their devotion to Lord Siva.

178

179

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

UPAMANYU

Vimala replied that if he prayed to Siva and Parvati he would
obtain all kinds of riches.

Sage Vyaghrapada had a wife named Vimala, a very chaste
lady entirely devoted to her husband. Both of them were true
devotees of Lord Siva. Although they were attacked by poverty,
they managed to serve their guests duly, and would eat their food
from what was left thereafter.
By the grace of Siva, a good son was born to them. They
christened him ‘Upamanyu’. The brothers of Vimala took her and
the child to their home for a few days and brought up the child with
extreme tenderness.
Upamanyu was being fed by cow’s milk, and was clad in rich
raiments. One after another, his uncles kept on fondling him. After a
while, Vimala wanted to return to her husband, along with her child.
So the brothers escorted her back to her husband’s home, after
presenting her and Upamanyu with rich gifts.
Vyaghrapada was, as noted, rich in spiritual wealth but not in
material wealth. But little Upamanyu was not aware of this fact.
Accustomed to the rich nourishment he got at his uncle’s home, he
asked his mother for cow’s milk and like. Vimala’s heart was broken,
for they had no cow which yielded milk at that time. For want of
something better, she gave him water mixed with some of milkpowder. Tasting it, Upamanyu said that what she gave him was not
real milk, and asked her whether it was fair on her part to deceive
him thus. At last he requested her to breast-feed him.
Because of her poor nourishment she could not even suckle
him. She regretfully conveyed her helpessness to her son.
The five-year-old Upamanyu told his mother: “I am sorry I
spoke rudely to you on account of my infantile ignorance. Please
tell who can save us from this poverty, and I will go and pray to
them.”

When Upamanyu assured his mother that he would go and
worship the divine couple in order to gain wealth, his father, who
heard their conversation, said: “Boy, you seem to be very innocuous.
All the worldly wealth is transient. The only prosperity that is eternal
is spiritual riches. That is why, though we too worshipped Lord
Siva, we never sought material wealth from Him. All that we
requested from Him was Salvation. If you still want plenty and
prosperity, keep chanting the holy mantra, NAMAH SIVAAYA.”
Upamanyu said: “Sir, if we get wealth, we can not only live in
comfort ourselves but also help those in need. We will then have
the necessary means to do good works and perform sacrificial
rites and the like. So please allow me to go and worship Siva.”
Both parents blessed Upamanyu, and he went to the forest
glades to perform penance.
Seated under a banyan tree, and turning towards Kailasa,
Upamanyu began his penance, chanting the sacred Mantra,
NAMASSIVAAYA. After a while he heard these words:
“Upamanyu, you are still a child. This jungle, where the wild animals
roam, is no place for you. Stop this penance and go home.”
As Upamanyu opened his eyes, he saw Indra before him,
speaking further: “Child, if you give up this penance, I shall give you
many rich gifts.”
Upamanyu replied: “Sir, stop all this nonsense. My sole aim in
life is to see Siva and Parvati. Till then my penance will continue.”
Discouraged, Indra went away.
As Upamanyu continued his penance, a tiger approached him
and began roaring frighteningly. Yet Upamanyu did not stir a bit. Pleased
with the boy’s determined devotion, Siva and Parvati appeared before

180

181

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

him. Seeing them he saluted them and said: “All that I wanted was to be
able to see you. Now my wish is fulfilled. Please remain as consecrated
idols in my home and accept my worship and service.”

“O Yudhisthira, if you want to defeat the Kauravas and regain your
lost kingdom, you have to pray to Lord Siva.” Then he went back
to Dvaaraka.

Caressing the child’s head, the divine couple said: “You have
pleased us even as though you are a little boy. So we grant that till
the end of ‘Rudra Age’ (which is ever-recurring ) you will be alive
as a rich, healthy and renowned youth, entirely dedicated to our
worship.”

Later sage Vyasa came there to inquire after the welfare of the
Pandavas. After honouring him appropriately, Yudhishthira said:
“Holy sage, your arrival has brought us cheer. Just now Lord Krishna
advised us to win the favour of Lord Siva. Please enlighten us on
the best way of doing so.”

By the mere wish of Parvati and Siva, the hermitage of
Vyaghrapada transformed itself into a mighty mansion. All the material
that man could ever wish, for his luxury and comfort, was evident
there. Upamanyu’s parents realised that their son’s penance was
successful and were eagerly awaiting his return home.

Vyasa replied; “Indeed Krishna’s words must be implicitly
obeyed. Arjuna is the most skilled warrior among you. If he worships
Lord Siva he will obtain the ‘Pasupata-Astra’. That weapon will
enable you to achieve your desired aim. May Lord Krishna bless
you!”. So saying, the sage suggested that Arjuna chant the NAMAH
SIVAAYA mantra during his penance, and then went on his way.

Glowing with spiritual splendour, Upamanyu was
returning home. Struck by his resplendence, the people on
the way offered him obeisance and escorted him with royal
honours to his home. Upamanyu hurriedly ran up to his parents
and fell prostrate at their feet. His parents knew not how to
bless him adequately. They wer merely shedding tears of
rapture. The gods in heaven began showering flower-petals
on the child-devotee.

Yudhishthira instructed his younger brother to go to Mount
Indrakila, pray to Lord Siva, and thereby fulfill the wishes of every
one of the brothers.

MOUNT INDRAKILA
Arjuna arrived at Mount Indrakila, which was a veritable feast
to the eyes, with its natural wealth and beauty.

Then Upamanyu related to the assembly how he was enabled
to see Siva and Parvati in person.

He found a delightful lake in the Asoka garden, and decided to
do his penance there.

Everyone was delighted. The parents embraced the boy again.
Upamanyu and his parents thereafter lived in rich comfort, and
contributed to the good causes and patronsied the poor and the
needy.

As usual, Indra, who is afraid of the devotees possible usurping
of his seat, came there in the guise of a celibate. He talked to Arjuna:
“Sir, who are you? Who is your favourite deity? What is the purpose
of your penance?”

PASUPATA WEAPON

When Arjuna replied him duly, Indra said: “You seem to be
very foolish. You fell into Krishna’s trap. I never heard of anybody
who prayed to God in order to be able to defeat his foes. Krishna
wanted to test you. Anyway, penance is for the people who want to

Visiting the Pandavas in exile, following their defeat in their
gambling with the Kauravas, Krishna spoke to the eldest of them;

182

183

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

gain Salvation. Go back to your brothers, fight like a true hero, and
win back your kingdom.”

Siva’s servant said: “Sir, you look like an innocent monk. Don’t
you know that you would incur sin by lying like this? My Lord tried
to help you. Do you want to be ungrateful to Him? Do you think
that Siva’s tribal servants will not come to my aid if you attack me
and prevent me from plucking this arrow? Now repent and pray to
Lord Siva, who will grant you many more arrows like this one.”

Arjuna said: “Sir, my wish is to get the Pasupata weapon from
Siva. I will pray for Salvation later on. Please don’t discourage me
but bless me.”
Then Indra revealed himself and said: “I admire your strong
determination. I just came here to test you. Lord Siva is always at
the beck and call of His devotees. He will definitely grant you wish.
Besides, I will send some of my retinue to be always at your service.”
Blessing Arujuna, Indra disappeared.
Arjuna stood on one leg and with one-pointed attention
continued to chant the sacred syllables, NAMASSIVAAYA.

MUKASURA
The demon Muka, assuming the form of a pig, approached
Arjuna, and circling him tried to pierce him.
Arjuna saw the fierce pig and began to think: “This animal who
is bothering me must be a demon. Its very sigt arouses my hatred
and enmity. It could not be a friend, for wise men like me can readily
distinguish between a friend and a foe. So I shall kill him and do my
penance in peace.” As Arjuna was about to take out an arrow and
fling it from the Gandiva bow, he heard a terrible roaring. He
discovered the sounds came from Lord Siva.
Arjuna’s discovery was right. To save Arjuna, Siva hit the pig
with an arrow. At the same time Arjuna also cast his arrow at the
pig. The pig fell to the ground. Revealing his true shape, the demon
Muka took to his heels. The gods showered flowers upon Arjuna.
Meanwhile Siva ordered one of his men to recover the arrow
he hit the pig with. As the man was plucking out the arrow, Arjuna
claimed that it was his own. Arjuna could not realise that it was
Siva’s arrow that actually killed Muka.

Arjuna was adamant: “You do not know who I really am. I do
not know who your real master is. Stop this nonsense and beg me
to surrender this arrow to you. Then I may grant your request. If
you do not like to do so, bring your master her.”

KIRATISVARA
Lord Siva cognised the situation and told His consort: “Parvati,
I would really enjoy a fight with the hero, Arjuna. I will assume the
form of a hunter and battle with him. I will then have a chance of
seeing his battling skill at first hand.”
Parvati said: “It is not fair on your part to test your devotees
in this fashion, because you are by nature obedient to them. Please
don’t pick a quarrel with him but assure him of your continuing
protection.”
But Siva was bent on his mission. He took long with him the
tribal army of his. Arjuna was terribly impressed by the tribal
leader’s personal magnetism. And yet he did not flinch from hitting
Siva (in disguise) with his arrows in quick succession. On their
side, the tribal retinue of Siva kept on aiming their arrows at Arjuna.
Arjuna tried to cut off the strings of the Siva-army’s bows. But
Siva did not flee; on the other hand, he caused Arjuna’s hits to be
ineffective and even broke his armour. Then Arjuna challenged
Siva to a duel. After a while he was too tired to continue the duel.
Helplessly prostrate on the ground, Arjuna cast a solemn look at
the tribal chief. In him he could instantaneously recognise Lord
Siva. Seeking the Lord’s forgiveness, he made his obeisance to

184

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

His feet. Siva embraced Arjuna in affection and admiration. The
gods showered flowers on them.

was angry with him, for he was aware that only divine wrath was
the reason behind his thirst.

Siva then told Arjuna: “I am impressed by your penance. My
idea in fighting with you was only to let Parvati see the nature of
your valour. Now accept the Pasupata weapon, by wielding which
you will be ever invincible. Hereafter you and your brothers will
enjoy all prosperity and regain your realm. Give your brothers my
blessings.”

Anasuya went in search of water. Nowhere was water to be
found. Then she prayed to Lord Siva to come to the rescue of her
husband, by enabling her to find water rightaway.

Arjuna thanked Siva and Parvati for their graciousness, and
taking up his newly-acquired Pasupata weapon, went back to his
brothers.
His brother and krishna congratulated Arjuna on the success
of his mission. Kunti Devi and Draupadi felt assured that their happy
days would soon be coming again.

ATRI AND ANASUYA
Sage Atri and his wife Anasuya were dedicated devotees of
Lord Siva. They were praying to the deity in the Kamyaka forest.
On account of the heat generated by their rigorous penance, the
trees were withering. The flora and fauna were also becoming extinct
gradually. Even the rivers around were drying up. The other sages
left the forest to seek refuge Siva for succour. Siva appeared before
them and assured them that he would see that the ‘heat’ of the
penance of Atri and Anasuya would be decreased.
Siva then addressed river Ganga embedded in his tresses: “Go
to the hermitage of Atri and Anasuya, and put them to a severe
test.”
Accordingly Ganga Devi went down to the Atri hermitage.
There Atri just finished his penance. He was feeling extremely thirsty
and requested his wife to fetch him water from his ‘Kamandalu’
(water vessel, used by ascetics). He was wondering why Lord Siva

185

Ganga Devi heard Anasuya’s wail and took pity on her. She
spoke in a disembodied voice: “Anasuya, you are indeed a nobly
chaste lady. I am pleased with your devotion to God and to your
husband. Just make a small hole in the ground behind. From that
hole will rise pure water. You can take it and quench your husband’s
thirst.”
As Anasuya followed Ganga’s instructions, the water, tasting
like ambrosia, came up. Taking a Kamandalu full of water from it,
Anasuya requested Ganga to stay on there till she came back,
after giving the water to her husband.
Meanwhile Atri was uneasily wondering at the delay in his wife’s
return and at the anger of Lord Siva. But just then Anasuya returned
with water, informing him about the arrival of Ganga Devi. Quenching
his thirst, Atri dropped tears of ecstasy, on hearing of the grace of
Ganga went to meet Ganga Devi. On approaching the spot where
the blessed lady appeared, he composed a hymn in praise of her
and begged her to remain there in one form of her myriad
manifestations. The river goddess acceded to his request, and the
little pond became a huge lake.
Siva and Parvati were delighted with the non-dual devotion of
Atri and Anasuya, and the divine couple also stayed on there in the
form of the cosmic images, to which the saintly couple prayed
incessantly during their earthly existence.

MADHU AND KAITABHA
Before Creation, the universe was filled with water everywhere.
Lord Vishnu was resting on a banyan leaf, which was a float in the

186

187

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

waters. As he was sleeping, from his ears came out two demons,
named Madhu and Kaitabha. They could not see the earth. Tired
after their vain quest, they returned to Vishnu and examined him
intensely. Then they witnessed in Vishnu’s navel the figure of the
prayerful Brahma. They asked Brahma who he was and why he
was praying.

Vishnu realised that the duo would come in the way of Creation,
and told them that he would give them a boon which would make
them vulnerable only to himself. The two demons agreed to be killed
by Vishnu, with the proviso that he kill them anywhere except on
water.

Without answering their repeated queries directly, Brahma
asked them in return to tell him who they were.
Madhu and Kaitabha spoke in unison: “You are being
impertinent. We were born of Vishnu’s ears. Anyway, to satisfy
your curiosity we tell you we are Madhu and Kaitabha. Now tell us
who you are.” Brahma replied “I came out of Vishnu’s navel-lotus.
I am praying to Siva to enable me to initiate the process of Creation.”
Then the demon-duo said: “You are foolish. You, who were
born from a part of Vishnu’s entity, have no right to remain there if
you want to receive Siva’s blessings. Go away to Kailasa. Else you
will be put to shame.”
Upon which Brahma worshipped the mother of the Vedas,
the PRIMAL ENERGY (PARA SAKTI). The Supreme
Energy incarnated Herself in the form of Kaali on the twelfth
day of the bright fortnight of the month of Phaalguna (about
March). Then Brahma appealed to her: “Mother, these demons
are threatening my very existence. Save me.” Sakti told him not
to worry but to wake Vishnu up, who will protect him and kill
the duo.

Vishnu placed the two men on his thighs and cut them into
pieces with his disc-weapon. Brahma sang the praises of Vishnu
and of the Mother Sakti (Kaali).

MAHISHASURA
(BUFFALO-DEMON)
Mahishasura was the son of Rambhasura. He received many
boons from Brahma, and with their aid was persecuting the gods
and the sages. They approached Brahma to plead before Siva and
Vishnu that, unless Mahishasura was done away with, there would
be no peace on earth or in heaven.

GODDESS DURGA

Then Vishnu opened his eyes. He ordered Madhu and Kaitabha
not to quarrel with Brahma, the father of creation, but to seek his
blessings.

Siva made a sign to Vishnu. Next he took out a bit of the
energy of Mother Sakti and, igniting it, created a maiden. The
newborn Goddess was filled with the energy of Siva on her forehead;
with that of Vishnu in her arms; with that of Brahma, in her feet;
with that of the sun, in her tresses; with that of the moon, in her
breasts; with that of Sachi Devi, in her waist; with that of Varuna, in
her thighs and hips; with that of Kshama, in her buttocks; with that
of Gotraripu, in her fingers; with that of Ghrini, in her toes; with that
of Dhatri ?, in her nose; and with that of the Tretagni Fire, in her
three eyes.

But the two demons said: “You are not right. How can we
tolerate the idea of a man, born of your navel, worshipping Siva?
We have power in our own right. We don’t need to seek Brahma’s
favour.”

To that divinely shining maiden were presented: the spear, by
Siva; the disc, by Vishnu; the conch and the rope, by Varuna; the
Kamandalu bowl, by Brahma; the silken robes, the diamond earrings,
the diamond ring, the pearl necklace, the golden anklets, the golden

188

189

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

bracelets and the silver ankle-ornaments, by the Milky Sea; the
golden lotus, by ‘Malavarthi’; the axe, by Visvakarma; the quiver,
by the Fire-God; the bow, by the Air-God; the ‘Kala’ staff, by the
God of Death (Yama); the sword and the shield, by Kaala Murti;
the diamond armour and mighty weapons, by Kama-Dhenu; the
lion-image, by Himavan; the honey-vessel by the moon; the diamond
crown, by Adisesha; the rosary, by Prajapati.

battle, cut off his head. The gods thanked her by way of raining
flower petals on her. The Gandharvas sang, and the Apsaras
danced, in celebration of the event.

After giving the gifts, they all worshipped her as goddess Durga.

KILLING OF THE DEMON,
MAHISHASURA
Enraptured, goddess Durga roared, as a sign of her intention
to root out evil and establish the good. The roar of the goddess
resounded in all the fourteen worlds. Hearing it, the buffalo-shaped
demon, Mahishasura, was angered and challenged her to a duel.
Durga took up the challenge with pleasure, and, after battling with
him and his army from the first day till the eighth day of the bright
fortnight of the lunar month of Asvayuja, put an end to the entire
retinue of the demon. Undaunted, the adamant Mahishaasura
uprooted many a mountain and flung them at the goddess, who
turned them into powder with her charmed weapons.
On the ninth day of the month of Aasvayuja, the goddess
assumed the form of Maha Lakshmi and spoke to Mahishasura: “O
wretched demon, how dare you fight with me? Now your end is
near.”
So speaking, she jumped upon him and crushed him under her
feet. Then she pierced his body with her spear, and tried to pull half
of his body apart. However, Mahishasura managed to extricate
himself from her hold, and flying up to the sky began hitting her with
a shower of arrows.
Laughingly repulsing his attack, the goddess took on the shape
of Sarasvati (godess of Learning), and, on the tenth day of their

This very goddess, Durga, assuming the form of Satakshi,
killed another demon, Durgasura, with her three pronged spear.
By praying to Durga, Lord Parasurama earned his success over
the Kshatriyas. By the grace of Durga, Kartaviryarjuna was able
to rule the globe for thousands of years. All those who worship
Durga will be blessed with every kind of prosperity.
During the nine-day (plus one day of final celebration of the
event of the killing of Mahishasura) festival of DASARA the goddess
Durga is prayed to in several ways and under various names like
Kali, Gauri, Maha Lakshmi,

SAGE MRIKANDU
The wife of sage Mrikandu is named Marudvati. She was wholly
devoted to the service of her husband, and used to treat his disciples
as her own children. The Mrikandu hermitage was the very centre
of Vedic learning.
The childless couple were uncomplaining about their fate,
but placed their faith in the merciful Providence.
The guests and the students were thanking their lucky stars
that they could find such parental and material hospitality in the
Mrikandu home.

DISRESPECT
Brahma and his consort were seated in their royal court, as
they were visited by the sages from all corners of the world. But the
gatekeepers did not allow sage Mrikandu in, because, they said,
that the childless sages had no permission to enter Brahma’s court.
Realising that it was no time to protest, the sage hung down his
head in shame and returned home.

190

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Marudvati was not to be seen welcoming him with her usually
cheerful countenance. He went inside the hermitage, and, seeing
her in distress, asked her the reason why she was sad.

SHIVA AND PARVATI

She replied: “Lord, in your absence many wives of the sages
called on me. As I was offering them hospitality, they asked me to
assemble our children also there. When I said that we had no children,
they turned away, saying that they would not receive the hospitality
of childless people. I am sorry that all my trouble, in preparing their
food, was in vain.”
Mrikandu informed her of his own similar disappointing
expperience in the Satyaloka of Brahma.
There and then the sage decided upon worshipping Siva and
Parvati. Marudvati also joined her husband in doing penance,
chanting the names of Lord Siva and His consort.
Sage Narada, who witnessed their rigorous penance, was
astounded by the sincerity of the couple’s devotion, and conveyed
the news of that fact to Lord Siva, adding that the sage couple
would be put to further shame if he refused their prayerful appeal
for progeny.
Parvati was touched. With a tear-filled voice, she said:
“Narada, I have many times appealed to my Lord to fulfil the
wish of the Mrikandu couple for children. Yet He had not
acceded to my request. Now your information will convince him
that He should not further delay His boon-offer.”
So saying, she convinced Siva about the need to favour His
devotees, and together they left for the Mrikandu hermitage.
Here at the hermitage there were signs of coming beneficence.
Mrikandu and Marudvati realised that the divine couple were on
their away, and were eagerly awaiting their arrival.

191

In the celestial sphere the music of the Siva retinue was
reverberating scintillatingly. In a little while Siva and Parvati, riding
their Nandi mount, touched ground. Mrikandu and Marudvati fell
prostrate at their feet.
Siva said: “Sage Mrikandu, I am pleased with the devotion of
yours and your spouse’s. But before I grant you your wish, I have
to inform you that you have to choose between a long-living, atheistic
and unworthy son and a worthy and wise devotee of Myself, who
will not live long.”
The sage couple, without hesitation, asked for a Siva-devotee,
albeit he would not live long.
‘So be it’, said Siva and returned to Kailasa, along with Parvati.

MARKANDEYA
Marudvati was with child. The wives of other sages
congratulated her and celebrated the event in traditional style. On
an auspicious day she was delivered of a male child. The child was
named Markandeya.
Even as a child, Markandeya was in the habit of going to the
Siva shrine, embracing and worshipping the Siva idol, reading the
Siva lore, chanting NAMAH SIVAAYA, praying to Siva image
with Bilva leaves, and writing the name of Siva ten million times.
Markandeya’s Upanayanam was performed when he was
seven years old, and later he was sent to the Gurukul to pursue the
Vedic studies.
Markandeya mastered the scriptural learning with in a short
period of time. He studied all the branches of Siva scriptures, and
was respecting the elders as much as he was worshipping Lord
Siva.

192

193

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

The parents of Markandeya were quite gratified by the great
learning and good conduct of their son.

Death’s long rope, Markandeya embraced the image of Lord Siva
tightly and prayed: “Lord Siva, God of Mercy and Compassion
and Forgiveness, the god of Death is approaching me. You alone
can prevent his carrying me away. I seek your refuge with all my
heart and mind and soul.”

Thus fifteen years passed by, when sage Narada arrived at the
Mrikandu hermitage. After receiving the honours from the parents
and the son, Narada told Mrikandu: “Sir, Lord Siva granted only a
limited span of life to your son, simply to test your faith. So please
perform another penance and obtain the favour of the Lord to see
that your son lives long.”
Mrikandu and his wife decided to accept the advice of Narada.

THE MEANS TO SALVATION
Then Narada addressed Markandeya: “By the grace of Lord
Siva you became the offspring of this pious couple. Besides, you
have completely studied the significance of the Siva entity. If you
keep praying to Him with non-dual devotion and dedication, you
are sure to receive His blessing for a long life.”
Markandeya went to the nearby Bilva forest and there installed
the earthy image of Lord Siva with due consecration. During the
three ‘sandhya’ periods (morning, noon and evening) he was praying
to the God, by reciting the Rudriya hymns eleven times. He supported
himself, by simply eating fruits for some days and later by just chewing
one Bilva leaf. Thus six months passed by.
The book-keeper of Yama, Chitragupta, read out to the God
of Death the record of the worthy actions of Markandeya, but also
mentioned that, now that the boy completed his sixteenth year, his
life-span was over. Duty-bound, Yama went down to the Bilva forest
to carry away the boy-saint to his kingdom of Death.

GOD OF DEATH
Markandeya heard the slight sound of a tingling bell. Yama
was arriving near his place of penance, on his buffalo mount. Seeing

The god of Death was astounded at the uncompromising
devotion of the boy-saint. Although he hated to take away that
figure of saintly effulgence, he had no choice but to perform his
apportioned duty. He threw out his lasso to pull up Markandeya,
and it surrounded the Siva image along with the boy. Undeterred,
Markandeya began worshipping Lord Siva, by unceasingly
repeating NAMASSIVAAYA.

THE GRACE OF LORD SIVA
Yama began to draw in his lasso. His pulling somewhat shook
up the Siva idol. And yet Markandeya did not release his hold of
the image (Linga). Yama was feeling the heat of Markandeya’s
penance-power to be unbearable. The clatter of the broken Linga
was heard on all corners of the universe. From inside the Linga the
three-eyed, angered Lord Siva arose, and, threatening the god of
Death with his terrible trident, said: “How dare you pull my own
image? If you persist in your foolish attempt, I will pierce you with
this Trisula.”
Yama replied: “Lord, I lassoed Markandeya, only because his
life-span had come to an end. Since the boy kept on embracing
your idol, my lasso surrounded it. Forgive me for pulling up the idol
also, along with the boy.”
Siva said: “Sir, be more careful in future in discharging your
duty. In granting him a short life I was merely trying to put his devotion
to test. I will now make him longliving. Now go back to your realm.”
Accordingly Yama returned to his abode.

194

195

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Shedding tears of rapture, Markandeya bowed to the feet of
Lord Siva. The Lord’s image blessed him: “O noble celibate, you
have withstood the trials and tribulations of the test to which you
were put. May you always remain a sixteen-year-old boy and please
Me and My Consort with your devotion!”

astounded, and went up to his father-in-law and prayed for his
pardon. Daksha told him: “Go to the Prabhasa region and there
install the Linga of Lord Siva in the form of Somesvara and perform
a penance by reciting NAMAH SIVAAYA. Then you will be freed
from my curse.”

CHIRANJIVI

As the Moon did accordingly, he felt the presence of Siva and
Parvati before him after some time. The godly couple told him:
“Chandra, you will gradually gain in brightness and lose it, in the
first half and the second half of the lunar month, respectively. You
will henceforth receive the love of all your wives equally.”

(LONG-LIVING MAN)
Markandeya performed the sixteen forms of consecrational
prayer to the image of Lord Siva. Siva and Parvati blessed him
again with long life. Mrikandu and Marudvati thanked the divine
couple for their mercy towards their child.
Siva and Parvati smilingly blessed them all again and
disappeared.

THE TWELVE LINGAS OF DIVINE LIGHT

1. SOMESVARA LINGA
In the region of Saurashtra, the Somesvara Linga is installed,
in the pilgrim centre of Prabhasa.
Daksha Prajaapati had twenty-seven daughters. All those
beautiful girls were married to the Moon. Rohini was the most
accomplished among those beauties; so the Moon was spending all
his time with her. The other sisters were naturally jealous of Rohini.
Therefore they complained to their father about the Moon’s
‘misdeeds’.
Daksha suggested to the Moon that he should treat alike all his
wives. The Moon was offended that Daksha was interfering in his
‘internal affairs’, and rejected his advice. Consequently, Daksha
cursed that the Moon be struck with the tubercular disease.
The brightness of the Moon’s rays was on the wane. The plants
and the trees were losing their sustenance, thereby. The Moon was

The Moon said: “O divine couple, I beseech you that you stay
on here in one form of your transcendent energy in this idol I have
consecrated to you.”
They said ‘so be it’ and entered in the idol in one form of their
energy.
The Moon was released from the ill-effects of his father-inlaw’s imprecation and returned to his celestial abode, to enjoy all
prosperity and felicity in the company of his twenty-seven consorts.
Because the Linga was installed by ‘Soma’ (Moon) the image
of Lord Siva at that pilgrim centre is called ‘Somesvara’.
This idea is conveyed in this prayerful sloka by Sankaracharya:
Sauraashtra dese visade ati-ramye
jyotir-mayam Chandra-kalaa-vatamsam,
Bhakti-pradaanaaya kripaa-avatirnam
Tam Somanaatham saranam prapadye.

2. MALLIKARJUNA (at Srisailam)
Ganapati and Kumarasvami are the beloved sons of Siva
and Parvati. The two boys were each pressing their parents that
one’s wedding should precede the other’s. To resolve this
competition between them, their parents suggested that he who
finishes first, the trip round the world, would be married first.

196

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Agreeing with the suggestion, Kumarasvami started on the
round-trip on his peacock mount. Ganapati is fat and his mount is a
humble rat. So he had no chance of competing with his brother on
equal terms. But using his imaginative power, he just went around
his parents, in accordance with sacred authority which sanctions
the worth of the round-the-earth trip to the man who goes around
his parents, as:

“Sree-saila-sikharam drishtvaa Punarjanma na vidyate”

Pitros cha pujanam kritvaa prakaantim cha karoti yah,
Tasya vai prithivee-janyam phalam bhavati nischitam.

UJJAIN - MAHA KALA LINGA

Accepting the wise gesture of Ganapati, his parents gave two
of Prajapati’s daughters Siddhi and Buddhi, in marriage to him.
When Kumarasvami returned from his roundtrip, assured of
his success, he was amazed to find his brother there already married.
Partly ashmed of his own lack of imagination, and partly offended
by the action of his parents (in getting Ganapati married earlier,
through a ruse as he thought), Kumaarasvami left the Silver Mount
in huff and went down to the Krauncha mountain in Srisailam.
Although Narada tried to dissuade him, Kumarasvami vowed that
he would never return to Kailasa.
Siva and Parvati, out of their great love for their son, went
down to the Krauncha Mountain and tried to persuade him to return
to the Silver Mountain. But they failed to convince Kumarasvami.
So they decided upon entering that pilgrim centre in one form of
their primal energy.

197

The prayer connected with this centre is:
Sree-saila-sange vibudha-atisange
Tulaadri-tunge-api mudaa vasantam,
Tam Arjunam Mallika-purvam Ekam
Namaami samsaara-samudra-setum.

(AVANTIKA)
In the country of Malaya, on the banks of the river Sipraa, lies
the city of Ujjayani, reputed as the place where the divine brothers,
Balarama and Krishna, studied under their Guru, Sandipa.
One Siddha of miraculous powers, named Manibhadra, offered
to the king of Avanti, Ujjvala, a precious sapphire, which would
give the ruler the ability to get his capital city planned in the manner
of Amaravati, the capital of Indra’s heavenly kingdom. The king
commissioned, with the aid of the precious stone’s miraculous power,
the divine architect, Visvakarma to build a city an area of twelve
square miles. That great city is called Ujjayani (Ujjain). It is also
known as ‘Avanti’. It is said to be one of the seven holy cities, a
visit to which paves the way to Salvation, as we learn from this
Sloka:
Ayodhyaa, Mathuraa, Maayaa, Kaasee, Kaanchee, Avantikaa,
Puri-Dvaaravati cha eva saptaite Moksha-daayakaah.

This Jyotirlinga is named ‘Mallikaarjuna’, the ‘Mallika’
(jasmine) standing for Parvati, and ‘Arjuna’ (white) standing for
Siva. Srisailam, where this ‘Linga of divine light’ is consecrated, is
also known as ‘Dakshina Kailasa’ (the Kailasa stationed in the
southern region)

In that city there once lived a highly learned Vedic scholar,
named ‘Vedapriya’. He had four sons: Vedapriya, Priyamedha,
Sukrita and Suvrata.

The Puranas declare that those that take a look at the tower of
the Mallikarjuna temple in Srisailam would be freed from the vicious
circle of birth and death and rebirth:

Vedapriya’s life was dedicated to the worship of Lord Siva,
and this devotional spirit of his brought him worldwide recognition
and renown.

198

199

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

There is a mountain called ‘Ratnamala’ near Avanti. On it
dwelt a demon, ‘Dushana’. Envious of Vedapriya’s fame, he
entered Avanti with the intention of harming that Vedic scholar.
All the other denizens of that town were extremely frightened,
but Vedapriya remained unmoved. He continued to pray to
Lord Siva. Seeing him thus engaged, Dushana said angrily: “You
Vedapriya, throw away your Siva Linga! Else I will cut off your
head.”

immersed in his devotion. Angered at the lack of response from
him, his mother threw way the Siva image. Srikara felt his heart
broken. He cried out: Lord Siva, my mother set at naught my
devotion and self-surrender to Thee. Forgive her because she knew
not what she was doing. Anyway, it is not the idol that matters, but
my devotion to Thee. If Thou art satisfied with my prayer, please
appear before me at once. Or else I will put an end to my life.” So
saying he fell in a swoon.

Vedapriya did not respond. Dushana tried to attack him. The
scholar sought Siva’s refuge with these words: “Hara, Hara,
Mahadeva, Pahi maam, Pahi maam, Raksha maam, Raksha maam!”.
Instantaneously, Bilva leaf came out of the Siva image, shining with
supernatural glory, and put an end to the demon and his army.

The naturally tender heart of Siva melted. He readily
presented Himself before the shepherd-devotee and placed His
hand on the head of the boy, by way of assuring him protection.
By the grace of that divine touch the boy regained his
consciousness. As he opened his eyes, he saw the ‘Jyotirlinga’
(The Idol of Divine Light) placed in the Maha kala shrine. Immediately
he embraced the image in reverential love. His mother, who saw him do
so, was immensely gratified at the devotion of her son.

Appearing in His own form, Siva told the scholar: “Vedapriya,
I have fulfilled my duty of punishing the wicked and protecting the
pious. Now seek whatever you want from me.”
The scholar replied: Lord, all that I wish is that you remain
here to save all your devotees.”
Accordingly, Siva agreed to remain there in one form of his
energy, and that Linga of His is known as “Mahakala Linga”.

SRIKARA
Among the rulers of Avanti was one Chandrasena, who was a
devotee of Lord Siva. Once a boy, named Srikara, belonging to the
shepherd clan, happened to see Chandrasena, while the latter was
engaged in worshipping Lord Siva. The boy was thrilled at that
splendid sight. He picked up a piece of the rock that was chipped
off the Siva idol, and taking it home anointed it with due ceremony.
He decorated the piece of rock in the manner of Lord Siva’s image,
and started praying to that deity. Even when his mother called him
to eat his dinner, he could not hear her voice, because he was so

At that point the great devotee-servant of Rama, Hanuman,
appeared there and declared: “Srikara’s devotion is matchless. It is
only because of the non-dual nature of his devotion that Lord Siva
with His consort, appeared before him. This boy was born by virtue
of divine design. In the eighth generation of his clan will be born
another great devotee, Nanda. His son will be born as Krishna, the
eighth incarnation of Lord Vishnu”. Completing has prediction,
Hanuman disappeared.
Chandrasena, who also was present there, was highly pleased,
and sang the praises of the pilgrim centre, Maha Kala, as expressed
in the third verse of the ‘Jyotirlinga Stotram’:
Avantikaayaam vihita-avataaram
Mukti-pradaanaaya cha sat-janaanaam,
Akaala-mrityoh pari-rakshana-artham
vande Mahaa-Kaala Mahaasuresam.

200

Siva Puranam

OMKARA KSHETRA
(PARAMESVARA LINGA)
River Narmada branched itself into two streams. The river
that flows towards the north retained the original name, Narmada,
and the one that flows southwards is known as Kaverika. Where
the river joins the sea, there is fertile region, which is known as
‘Sivapuri’ as well as ‘Mandhata Puram’ (because there the emperor
Mandhata prayed to, and obtained the grace of Lord Siva.
(‘Kapiladhara’ is the place of confluence with the sea for river
Narmada.
Sage Narada went to the Vindhya mountain on his way back
from the pilgrim centre, Gokarna, Kshetra. The mountain king,
Vindhya, offered Narada due hospitality, and inquired about the
nature of the mountain-king who is said to be much larger than he.
Smilingly, Narada, said: “I take pity on you. There is only one
who is greater than you. He is Mount Meru. The sun, the moon and
the stars revolve round him. The peaks of that mount kiss the
heavens.”
Saying that, the sage went on his way.
Vindhya prayed to Lord Siva, so that he could become larger
and higher than Mount Meru. The deity was pleased with his penance
and offered him any boon he wanted.
Vindhya said: “Lord, I beseech you that you stay on my top in
one of your forms of Energy, and that you see that the three worlds
consider me to be greater than Mount Meru. At the end of my life I
beg that I be granted the union with your universal Soul.”
The gods and the sages who assembled there requested Lord
Siva to grant Vindhya’s wish, because it was just.
Lord Siva acceded to their request and installed Himself there
in the forum of the sacred syllable ‘AUM’, as well as in the image
of the Master Spirit, ‘Paramesvara’.

Siva Puranam

201

Sankaracharya’s verse recounts the foregoing:
Kaaverikaa-Narmadayoh pavitre
samaagame sat-jana-taaranaaya,
Sadaa eva Maandhaatri-pure vasantam
Om-kaaram isam Sivam Ekam ide.

MOUNT HIMALAYA
(KEDAARA LINGA)
Of all the Himalayan peaks, known for their holy atmosphere,
the Kedara pilgrim centre is the holiest. To its west flows the river
Mandakini; to the east, river Alakananda. On the banks of Mandakini
stands the holy shrine of Kedaresvara, and on the banks of
Alakananda lies the temple of Badari-Narayana. Mandakini and
Alakananda have their confluence at Rudra-Prayaga, and at
Devaprayaga they join the river Ganga. That is why all those pilgrims
who take a dip in the river Ganga justly feel that they have the
benefit of visiting Kedara and Badari pilgrim centres by doing so.
Nara and Narayana, settling down at the Badarika-Asrama,
and daily bathing in the river Mandakini, were in the habit of
consecrating the Siva image with the Mandakini water, besides
offering the idol the Bilva leaves and the lotus flowers.
One day Siva appeared before them. The duo said: “Lord, we
have been praying to Thee, with the idea of doing good to the entire
world. Kindly incarnate Thy self in one of Thy forms at this Kedara
Kshetra, and grant the wishes of all those devotees who worship
Thee here.” Since then Lord Siva has been residing there as
Kedaresvara.
The Pandavas once visited the Kedara Kshetra. In order to
test Bhima, Lord Siva (Kedaresvara) assumed the shape of a
‘Mahisha’ (buffalo) and was passing by. The Pandavas pursued
it. Bhima dragged it by its tail. The tail snapped, and he could not

202

203

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

hold the buffalo. The Pandavas converted that tail into a Linga
and consecrated it prayerfully, thereby enabling themselves to enjoy
worldly bliss. The head of the ‘Mahisha’ was installed at Nepal,
and was consecrated there as ‘Pasupati’ (the lord of all living
creatures). They who pray to the tail at Kedaresvara shrine and
to the head at the Pasupati temple in Nepal, would be granted the
Salvation of rebirthlessness.

Bhima prayed to Brahma, and received the deity’s blessings,
to gain matchless strength and valour. To test his newly acquired
prowess, Bhima started persecuting the gods. Not content with the
harm he had done to the celestial citizens, he went up to Vaikuntha
in search of Vishnu. Vishnu could not be seen. Bhima returned home
and imprisoned the king of Kamarupa, Sudakshina, and his wife.
Sudakshina was since birth an ardent devotee of Lord Siva. He
and his wife prayed to Siva for succour.

Here is Adi Sankara’s hymn to the Kedaresvara, who is prayed
to by all the denizens of both heaven and earth:

Among the Sahya mountain-peaks, Dhakini is the most reputed.
In the land of ‘Kamarupa’ there is a place called ‘Dhakini’, wherein
dwelt a demon of the same name. His mother was ‘Karkati’. Her
father was ‘Karkata’ and her mother was ‘Pushkasi’.

Bhima threatened that unless they stopped praying to Siva they
could not escape death at his hands. They replied that they would
rather die than stop praying to Siva. Forgetting himself with wrath,
the demon asked them to pray to him. When they refused, Bhima
flung his sword at the Linga of the Lord. Then from the image arose
Siva’s ‘pinaka’ weapon and turned Bhima’s sword into powder.
So did Siva break into pieces the spear flung by the demon. Then
when Siva shouted in anger, the demon lost his consciousness out
of fright, and died right away. His retinue took to their heels. The
saintly royal couple, and the gods who saw the fight, requested
Siva to stay there in one of His forms. Since he killed Bhima, there,
place where he is consecrated is known as ‘Bhima-Sankara Linga
Kshetra’.

Karkata and Pushkasi tried ot catch and eat up the disciple of
sage Agastya, Sutikshna. Sutikshna cursed them to turn into ashes.

This idea is conveyed by this ‘Jyotirlinga Sloka’ of
‘Sankaracharya:

The beautiful Karkati was roaming all alone in the jungles. The
brother of Ravana, Kubhakarna, saw her and fell in love with her.
She told him that she was the wife of Viradha, who was killed by
Lord Rama. Still, he refused to listen to her plea to leave her alone,
and ravished her. Their child is the demon, Bhima (not to be confused
with the Pandava of that name).

Yam Dhaakinee-Saakinikaa-samaajaih
nishevyamaanam pisitaasanaih cha,
Sadaa eva Bhima-aadi-pada prasiddham
Tam Sankaram Bhakta-hitam namaami.

Karkati told her son that his father and his uncle, Ravana were
killed by Rama, and asked him to revenge their death, by persecuting
the godly race.

Ravana defeated Vaisravana and became the Lord of Lanka.
Then Vaisravana performed a penance, praying to Lord Siva.
Pleased with his penance, Siva appeared before him and told him:

Maha-adri paarsve cha tate ramantam
sampujyamaanam satatam munindraih,
Sura-Asuraih Yaksha-Mahoraga-aadyaih
Kedaaram isam Ekam eede.

BHIMA SANKARA
(AT DHAKINI PILGRIM CENTRE)

SRI KASI (VISVESVARA)

204

Siva Puranam

“At the spot where I cut off Brahma’s fifth head with my nails, I will
offer you an area of ten square miles. There build a holy city with
the help of the divine architect, Visvakarma”. Saying which, the
Lord disappeared.
Accordingly Vaisravana invited Visvakarma to build a mighty
holy city, in accordance with ‘Vastu Sastra’.
When Vaisravana prayed to Siva and Parvati, the divine couple
entrusted him with the rulership of the northern world, and rename
him ‘Kubera’. The city built by Visvakarma is called ‘Kaasi’. Kubera
was ceded the lordship of Kasi as well as of the Yaksha kingdom,
with Alaka as its capital. At the request of Kubera, Siva and Parvati
respectively incarnated themselves, at Kaasi, as Visvesvara and
Annapurna. Since the city is surrounded by the river-branches Varana
and Asi on either side, it is also known as ‘Varanasi’.
Varanasi is reputed for its wish-fulfilling presiding deity, Siva,
and for the alms-giving of His spouse, Parvati, in the form of their
incarnations.
The place where Vishnu performed penance in that holy city is
called ‘Mani-Karnika Ghat’; where Brahma performed a sacrificial
rite is called ‘Dasasvamedha Ghat’; where Harischandra kept watch
over the crematorium is called “Harischandra Ghat”.
It is verily declared that death in Kasi would ensure Immortality
(Kaasyaam tu maranaat Muktih), because Lord Visvesvara instructs
in the right ear of the dead the salvation assuring Taraka Mantra.
Indeed even the very thought of visiting Kaasi has the effect of
actually visiting that city, as this verse says:
Kadaa Kaasim gamishyaami kadaa drakshyaami Sankaram,
Iti bruvaanah satatam Kaasi-vaasa-phalam labhet.
In the Kaasi region itself are several other holy centres,
consecrated to the various deities, as one can learn from this verse:

Siva Puranam

205

Visvesam Maadhavam Dundhim Dandpaanim cha Bhairavam,
Vande Kaasim Guham Gangaam Bhavaanim Manikarnikaam.
Besides, the spirit of Goddess Sarasvati is latent in Kaasi.
Therefore the Vedic scholars at Kasi receive Her grace ceaselessly.
Even during Pralaya (period of annihilation), Kasi will avoid
destruction, because Lord Siva would lift it up from the universal
deluge, by fixing it on his trident.
The real purpose of the establishment of the Kasi pilgrim centre
and of the visit to it is to realise the essential identity of the individual
creature with its Universal Self. This idea was conveyed by Sage
Agastya when he was taking leave of that holy city, in order to go
and quell the vanity of the Vindhya mountain.
Sage Vyaasa paid a glorious tribute to the exemplication of all
the assets of Lord Siva in the city of Kasi.
Adi Sankara, in his ‘Kasi Panchaka’ prayer made it clear that
by visiting the sacred city of Kasi and worshipping Visvanaatha and
Annapurna there, one begets the good results of visiting all the holy
places, as well as the power of learning the truth of all philosophy,
which is that the soul alone is real and that the body is unreal.
The same Aachaarya praises Kaasi in the following ‘Jyothirlinga’
verse as the repository of the powers of Lord Visvanaatha who
cleanses the devotee of his sins and creates in him the blissful
awareness of the Existence-Consciousness Beatitude of the living
God:
Sa-aanandam aananda-vane vasantham
aananda-kandam hata-paapa-brindam,
Vaaraanasi-naatham anaatha-naatham
Sree Visvanaatham saranam prapadye.

MANIKARNIKA
Vishnu, who dwelt in Kasi, with the intention of effecting the
universal creation, began worshipping Siva. During the course of

206

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

his rigorous penance, many a white drop that emanated out of his
tired physique sprouted up into the sky. Looking at that development,
Vishnu shook his head. Because of that movement, the diamond
ear ring on his right ear dropped down. Where that ornament fell,
since then, came to be known as ‘Mani Karnika Sthala’.

TRYAMBAKA LINGA

Here Siva uplifted with his trident the city of Kasi which was
about to be submerged in the universal deluge. The Cosmic Person
(Vishnu), along with his consort, Mother Nature (Prakriti), rested
himself there. From the navel of Vishnu arose Brahma. With the
permission of Siva, Brahma began the process of creating the
universe.
Sankaracharya praised the Manikarnika pilgrim centre, as the
hallowed ground, treading on which, with reverence, the devotee is
assured of the kingdom of heaven.
Kala Bhairava, in order to be freed from the sin of killing a
Brahmin, went to Kasi and worshipped Visvanatha and Annapurna
there.
Sankaracharya hymned the Kala Bhairava deity as one who
assures his devotee both worldly felicity and heavenly salvation.
The Acharya, in singing the praises of Bhavani, declared that,
by thrice uttering that holy name, the worshipper is guaranteed
deliverance from delusion and distress.
Likewise, the great seer composed prayers to Dhundhi
(Ganapati) and Kumara Svami, highlighting their various individual
virtues, which the devotee is able to reflect within himself, by means
of true devotion to those two brothers, the noble sons of Siva and
Parvati.
Before worshipping Visvanatha and Annapurna, the pilgrim must
take a dip, with his clothes on, at the Mani Karnika Ghat on the
banks of the Ganges, and then pray to Vishnu as well as to the SunGod.

207

(ON THE BANKS OF GAUTAMI)
In the region of Nasika, near the Sahyagiri, lies Brahmagiri. In
its vicinity sage Gautama built his hermitage, and was dwelling in
peace along with his wife, Ahalya, and his several disciples. By
worshipping Lord Siva for many years, the sage obtained many
favours from that deity.
After a few years, there was drought and famine in that area.
The agricultural fields became barren. There was not even drinking
water available. The cattle had no fodder, and the entire plant life
withered away. All creation was crying for help.
Sage Gautama prayed to Lord Varuna for six months. Pleased
with his penance, the deity appeared before him and told him to dig
a tank, which that God of Waters duly fill up and which would
never go dry.
Gautama ordered a tank to be dug, which was replenished by
Varuna. The area once again became fertile, and the people and the
cattle had plenty of nourishment.
Learning about that meracle, many sages glow with their
spouses, migrated to that place, built their respective hermitage,
and were living in peace and prosperity.
One day when Gautama’s disciples, went to fetch the pure
waters from the lake for their Guru’s worship, there the wives of the
other sages were about to take a dip in it. The pupils requested the
ladies to make way for them. The Ladies simply laughed at the
boys, saying that it was not only their teacher that was entitled to
use the holy waters for his worship but every one of them also had
to bathe there and take home that water for the consecration of
their favourite deities.
The disciples returned to the hermitage and reported the incident
to Ahalya. Ahalya took the vessel herself and left for the lake. The

208

209

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

wives of the other sages were staring at her inquisitively. Quietly
Ahalya filled her vessel, and without speaking a word to the ladies,
returned home.

Before leaving his old hermitage, Gautama sought the advice
of the sages as to how best he can be freed from his folly. The sages
suggested that he might go round the earth thrice; that he might
similarly walk around the Brahmagiri for a hundred and one times;
that he might obtain the grace of Lord Siva by assiduously
worshipping His image; that, with the help of Lord Siva’s grace, he
might bring down the celestial stream, Ganga, to the spot where the
false cow was killed; and that when the river flows at that place he
would install one crore Lingas of Lord Siva there and pray to them.

The sage-wives were offended at Ahalya’s indifference. Bent
on revenge, they told lies about Ahalya to their respective husbands.
The other sages prayed to Ganapati, who, pleased with their
penance, appeared before them and asked them to seek whatever
they want from him. They told him: “Lord, the disciples of Gautama,
and Ahalya, shamed our wives. Grant that Gautama leave his
hermitage along with his wife and his disciples.”
Ganapati reprimanded them for their ingratitude, and warned
them that their attempt would only recoil on them. Yet, they persisted.
Ganapati thought: “One cannot turn a bad man into a good man,
nor can make a bad man of a good man, any more than can a dog
become a cow and vice versa.”
So thinking, he turned himself into a famished cow and started
grazing the fields nearby. Gautama saw that sight. He flung at that
false cow a piece of grass, which he endowed with charmed powers.
No sooner than the grass-blade fell on it, the cow died. What a pity
that even the sages, gifted with clairvoyance, are at times led by
destiny into such a thoughtless action!
As soon Gautama and his spouse realised that it was a cow in
disguise, they feared what retribution might be in store for them.
The other sages told Gautama that, in as much as they cannot bring
themselves to look at man who killed the holy cow, he and his wife
must leave that place and go elsewhere.
Gautama and his wife then left for a place about four miles
away, and there built a new hermitage. The sage prayed to Lord
Siva there, for the expiation of his thoughtlessness in killing a holy
cow.

When for a few days Gautama prayed to Lord Siva, the
merciful deity appeared before him and asked him to seek any boon
he wanted. When Gautama confessed to his sin, Lord Siva said
that the real fault was with the other ungrateful sages. Then Gautama
insisted that the Lord cause the river Ganga to flow along the path
where the pseudo-cow died, so that the cow may come back to life
and deliver him from his sin.
Accordingly, Lord Siva released the sacred river from his braid.
Gautama then prayed to the Mother Ganga thus: “Mother Ganga,
you are the most sacred of all rivers. After freeing me from my sin of
cow-killing, please sanctify the three worlds by causing your branches
to flow here and everywhere.”
Ganga acceded to his request, but said that, after flowing at
that spot and over the three worlds, she would return to her abode
in the tresses of Lord Siva. Gautama was disappointed on hearing
her words. He hoped that Ganga would keep flowing there as well
as over the rest of the three worlds. Detecting the reason for the
sage’s disappointment, Siva instructed Ganga to stay there for the
duration of that ‘Manvantara’ (cyclical age). Ganga said that she
would gladly do so, only if the Lord too would remain there with
her. Siva agreed to do so.
Then Gautama consecrated the idol of Siva there, and called
the aspect of Siva’s godhead there ‘Tryambakesvara’.

210

211

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Since Gautama brought down the river Ganga to that area, the
stream is known as ‘Gautami’. It is also called ‘Godaavari’, because
the ‘Go’ (cow) died there and was brought back to life by the flowing
of the celestial stream. On the banks of the river Godavari, the sin
remover Siva shines as ‘Tryambakesvara’, as this ‘Jyotirlinga’ verse
of Adi Sankara celebrates:

Vainglorious in his newly acquired power, Ravana did not grasp
the inner meaning of the Lord’s warning, and was carrying the ‘selfimage’ of Siva to Lanka.

Sahya-adri paarsve vimale vasantam
Godaavari-tira pavitra dese,
Yat darsanaat paatakam aasu naasam
Prayaati Tam Tryambakam Isam eede.

SRI VAIDYANATHA LINGA
Ravana, the Lord of Lanka, was a great devotee of Lord Siva.
Even when he prayed to the Lord for a long time, on mount
Himalaya, He did not appear before him. Undeterred, Ravana
increased the intensity of his penance by sitting amidst the ‘Five
fires’; surrounding himself with fire during summer; sitting in the rain
during monsoon; and standing on ice during winter. When Siva still
did not present Himself before him, Ravana decided on putting an
end to his life. Accordingly, he began cutting off each of his ten
heads and was offering them to Siva. Even when he presented the
ninth head, Siva did not take pity on him. When at last Ravana was
about to sever his last remaining head, Siva was convinced of his
true devotion and appeared before him, saying that he could seek
any boon he wanted from Him (as soon as Siva made his presence
felt, the nine heads of Ravana were restored to their original position.)

Lord Ganapati was offended that, as tradition demanded,
Ravana did not pray to Him in the first place. So He devised a plan
to see that Ravana could not make the ‘Aatma-Linga’ his own.
On his way to Lanka, Ravana had to answer a call of nature.
So he asked a passing shepherd to hold the sacred idol till he
returned. The shepherd found the idol increasing steadily in its weight.
Unable to hold it in his hands any longer, the boy cried: “O Ravana,
I acceded to your request, under the impression that this is a small
piece of stone; now I am not able to bear its weight.” Ravana was
terrified: he feared that his whole penance would be in vain if the
boy put down the idol on bare ground. Hurrying back, Ravana
shouted: “Dear good boy, please don’t drop that image. If you hold
on to it, I will present you with a diamond necklace.”
However, the shepherd-boy could no longer hold the ‘AatmaLinga’, dropped it at a spot known as ‘Chitaa-Bhumi’, and
disappeared instantaneously. The shepherd is none other than
Ganapati in disguise.

Ravana thanked the Lord for appearing before him, and
requested Him that He install Himself at Lanka and that even when
an enemy cuts off any of his heads they be reinstated readily.

Ravana tried his best to pull out the Siva image from the ground,
but could not. Even though his whole body was wounded and
bleeding in the process, Ravana persisted in pulling out the idol.
When he was shedding tears of dejection and disappointment, an
aerial voice said: “O king of Lanka, you cannot uproot the Aatmalinga. To let the wounds on your body heal, come here at midnight
and pray to this idol.”

Siva agreed, and offered Ravana his “Aatma-Linga”, to be
consecrated at Lanka, with the warning that if Ravana put it down
on earth on the way back home, it would be firmly rooted in that
particular spot and cannot be removed.

Pleased with this advice, Ravana placed his ring on the Aatmalinga and uttered a prayer consecrated to Lord Siva. Slowly his
wounds healed. Enraptured, Ravana composed the ‘Siva Tandava
Stotra’ (the hymn of Siva’s Cosmic Dance), which addresses the

212

213

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Lord as the embodiment of all universal virtues, and, by worshipping
the Lord with which prayer, the devotee is delivered from all earthly
bonds, if he seeks liberation, or endowed with all riches, if he wants
worldly prosperity.

Learning about it, Daruka wanted to punish the prisoners much
more cruelly. But in vain. Suparva sought the succour of Siva with
an increasingly earnest appeal. Siva then appeared before Suparva
and gave him the Pasupata weapon, with the help of which Suparva
killed many a demon.

Still singing the praises of Lord Siva, Ravana returned to the
city of Lanka.
The Aatma Linga which he installed is known as ‘Vaidyanatha
Linga’, by praying to which the worshipper would be freed from all
his ills, according to Adi Sankara who composed this Jyotirlinga
verse:
Purva-uttare prajvalikaa-nidhaane
Sadaa vasantam Girijaa-sametam,
Sura-asura-aaraadhita-paada-padmam
Sri Vaidyanaatham tam aham namaami.

NAGA NATHA LINGA
Once upon a time there was a demoness called Darukaa. In
her childhood she prayed to Parvati, and obtained from the goddess
the boon that her sons might live on the banks of the river Sindhu,
amidst the seas.
Darukaa married a demon named Daruka(h). Both of them
were living on the West Coast, in an area which extended upto two
thousand miles, and were persecuting the sages in the area. Unable
to withstand that persecution, the sages went to a sage for help.
That great sage imprecated that all those demons who wrong the
innocent sages would die instantaneously.
Daruka shifted his residential garden into the middle of the
ocean, and was torturing all those people who were sailing by. One
of the sailors who was imprisoned by Daruka happened to be
Suparva, a devotee of Lord Siva. Suparva placed an idol of Siva in
the prison and began praying to it, along with his co-prisoners.

Meanwhile Parvati told Siva: “Lord, Darukaa is a devotee of
mine. She received a blessing from me that her sons could live in the
midst of the seas. So please save her.” Siva agreed and stayed
there in the form of ‘Nagesa Linga’.
Siva and Parvati were thereafter dwelling in the Daruka forest,
with the appellations, ‘Nagesvara’ and ‘Nagesvari’ respectively.
That those who pray to that divine couple would receive all
blessings is the import of this Jyotirlinga verse:
Yaamye sadange nagare ati-ramye
vibhushita-angam vividhaih cha bhogaih,
Sat-bhakti-mukti-pradam Eesam Ekam
Sri Naaga-naatham saranam prapadye.

RAMESVARA LINGA
After killing Ravana, Rama crowned Vibhishana as the king of
Lanka. On his way back to Ayodha, Rama, accompanied by Sita,
Lakshmana and others, stopped at Dhanushkoti. At the suggestion
of the wise men, Rama wanted to install the Siva Linga at that spot,
as expiation of his sin of killing a Brahmin.
Rama commissioned Hanuman to go to Mount Kailasa and
fetch an image of Lord Siva. Even when the auspicious moment for
the installation ceremony was approaching, Hanuman had not
returned. So Rama had no choice but to install the idol Siva made
of the sand particles. When Hanumaan came back with the Siva
idol, he learnt about what transpired, with distress. Sita and Rama
were sorry to see Hanumaan so distressed.

214

215

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Rama said: “Hanumaan, go remove the sand idol we already
installed and replace it by the one which you brought.”

the former had no children and the latter had them, Sudeha
complained to her husband about the incident. Sudharma consoled
her duly and suggested that she touch one of the two flowers they
laid on the idol of Siva. Examining the flower she touched, her
husband said that it is unlikely she would beget a child. Sudeha was
dejected.

Hanumaan failed to lift the already-installed sand idol.
Hanumaan realised the power of Siva’s might. To placate
Hanumaan, Rama installed the idol that the former brought, alongside
the sand idol. The one Sita built is called “Rameswara Linga”, and
the one Hanuman brought is known as “Hanumadiswara Linga”.
After the consecration of the idols, Ramalingesvara appeared
before Rama and told him: “You are now freed from your sin of
Brahmin-killing. I shall remain, in one of my aspects, in the two
Lingas you have installed, in order to protect all those people who
worship the idols.”
It is popularly believed that every devotee who thrice brings
the waters of Ganga from Varanasi, and, with them, consecrates
the idol at Raamesvara, would be able to fulfil all his wishes.
Here is the Jyotirlinga, sloka dedicated to this place of
pilgrimage:
Sutaamra-parnee jalaraasi-yoge
nibadhya setum visikhaih asankhyaih,
Sriraamchandrena samarpitam tam
Raamesvara-aakhyam niyatam namaami.

GHRISHNESVARA LINGA
The Ellora caves are world-renowned for their frescoes. Near
those caves is the Devagiri fort. In that place lived a devotee of
Lord Siva, the Vedic scholar Sudharma. His wife is Sudeha. The
good couple had no children. Since it is said that the couple which
have no son are deprived of salvation (“Aputrasya gatih na asti”),
they were much perturbed in mind.
One day, after visiting a neighbouring lady, who taunted her
that she (Sudeha) would not be her (the neighbour’s) equal, because

Thinking over the matter, Sudeha decided to get her unmarried
sister, Ghusmala, to marry Sudharma. She overruled her husband’s
protests and got Ghusmala and Sudharma married. Sudharma was
treating his two wives with equal love.
Preparing one hundred and one earthy idols of Lord Siva,
Sudharma, accompanied by Ghusmala, was every day worshipping
them, before immersing them in a nearby lake.
In due course Ghusmala gave birth to a beautiful son. The boy
was brought up in proper style and when he came of age was married
to an accomplished girl.
Ghusmala was specially honoured by her new in-laws, which
aroused the envy of Sudeha. She thought that all this was due to
her husband’s neglect of her.
Although Ghusmala asked her sister to treat her son as her
(Sudeha’s) own, Sudeha still bore her sister a grudge, and one
midnight cut into pieces the sleeping son of Ghusmala. She dropped
the pieces of the boy’s body in the lake, and returned to sleep in her
bedroom, as though she were not aware of any untoward happening.
The daughter-in-law of Ghusmala went to meet her husband
in their bedroom, but could not find him. Broken hearted, after her
search for him proved futile, she begged Sudeha to inform her about
his whereabouts. When Sudeha expressed her inability to enlighten
her, the daughter-in-law went to the prayer-room, wherein
Sudharma and Ghusmala were worshipping the earthen idols of
Lord Siva. When Ghusmala heard her daughter-in-law’s lament,

216

217

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

she said: “That compassionate Lord who gave me my son in the
first place will now see to his safety.” Then prayerfully thinking of
Lord Siva, Ghusmala left for the tank for the immersion of the earthen
images of His, accompanied by Sudharma and the daughter-inlaw.

Merely surviving on forest-leaves, he was offering a severe
penance in favour of Lord Siva. Once when he was cutting the
Kusa grass, one of his fingers was cut. Since from his finger oozed
the blood which resembled the juice of the leaves, and since he
lived on leaves, he is known as ‘Pranada’ (the eater of leaves).

Ghusmala found the pieces of her son’s dead body and put
them together, upon which the boy came back to life and bowed to
his parents. His wife went near him. Everyone who saw the miracle
praised Lord Siva for His benevolence.

Siva went up to Pranada, in the form a Brahmin, in order to
grant him a boon. Pranada began to run away from Him. But the
‘Brahmin’ caught him by the hand and said: “Why are you fleeing?
Is it because my blood is leaf-green? Just see, how the sacred ash
oozes if I cut my finger.” When the Lord suited action to His words,
the ash did flow out. Seeing the miracle, Pranada said: “Lord, forgive
my folly. I see that Thou art Lord Siva in the guise of a Brahmin.
Please reveal Thy real form to me.”

The son revealed Sudeha’s treachery to Ghusmala, but she
had not entertained any vengeful thoughts against her wicked sister.
Then Lord Siva appeared before them. Ghusmala, her husband,
her son and her daughter-in-law fell prostrate at His feet. Siva
admired Ghusmala for her devotion, and asked her to cut her sister’s
body in retaliation for her misdeed.
Ghusmala said: “Lord, I appreciate Thine advice, but I know
that by Thy grace my sister will reform herself. Forgive her. Kindly
remain in this lake in one of Thy forms, and protect all those that
pray to Thee.”
Thereupon Lord Siva agreed to stay in the middle of that tank,
under the appellation of “GHRISHNESWARA”.
Here is the Jyotirlinga verse in praise of that bountiful and
merciful Lord:
Ilaa-pure ramya-vasaalake asmin
samullasantam cha jagat-varenyam,
Vande mahodaara-tara-svabhavam
Ghrishnesvara-aakhyam saranam prapadye.

THE POWER OF VIBHUTI (SACRED ASH)
In the clan of sage Bhrigu was born the great Brahmin, Pranada,
who was a sincere devotee of Lord Siva.

Siva complied with his request and told him: “I am very fond
of this sacred ash, and all those who smear themselves with it will
be freed from their sins.” Pleased, Pranada smeared himself wholly
with the holy ash. The best form of the ash is that which is obtained
from the sacrificial fire.
This sloka should be recited at the time of smearing the sacred ash:
Srikaram cha pavitram cha
soka-roga-nivaaranam,
Loke vasikaram pumsaam
bhasman trai-lokya-paavanam.
(The ash, sanctifying the three worlds, is so beneficial to its
wearer as to bestow on him wealth, freedom from disease and
distress, and the ability to master all the world.

RUDRA-AKSHA-MALA (ROSARY)
Once upon a time Siva paused during his penance and opened
His eyes. From them had flown drops of water, which turned into
rosary-beads. So they are named after Him, ‘Rudra’ (Siva). Wearing

218

219

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

the rosary-beads, which are beloved of Siva, the wearer gains bliss,
and sees his heart’s wishes fulfilled.

divided his entire property among his sons. Leaving his wife,
Sugunaavati, in the care of his eldest son, Karma Siddha, he visited
all the important pilgrim centres, including Varanasi, where, deserting
his mortal coil, he was finally united with Lord Siva.

Among the flowers that are dear to Siva are the lily and the
jasmine; and, among the fruits, are the coconut and the banana.

THE SHAPE OF ‘AUM’
The three root-letters that together make up the sacred syllable,
‘Pranava’ (AUM), are ‘A’, standing for Siva; ‘U’, for the Primal
Energy (Para Shakti); and ‘M’, for Parvati. So it is always beneficial
to utter all the sacred Mantras, prefixing and suffixing them with
‘AUM’.
Especially the five-lettered Mantra, NAMAH SIVAAYA,
uttered with ‘AUM’ confers immeasurable benefit on the utterer.
The reason for this is that Siva is the Lord of all studies, of all the
living creatures and of the creative energy, as the following Vedic
Mantra maintains:
Isaanah sarva-vidyaanaam
Isvarah sarva-bhutaanaam
Bhrahmaadhipatih, Brahmanah adhipatih
Brahmaa Sivah me astu sadaa Sivah AUM

THE GLORIOUS SIGNIFICANCE OF SIVA LINGA
By worshipping the image of Lord Siva, the worshipper begets
all the fruits of all his wishes. One can make the image from clay or
silver or gold. Of the Trinity, Siva is the greatest (because, even
though he destroys, he is responsible for the Re-creation). Similarly, of
all the rivers. Ganga is the holiest. Of all the Mantras, Gaayatri is the
mightiest. Of all the Linga images, the one made of clay is the best.

NANDIKESVARA
On the banks of the river Reva there is a town named
Karnataka. There lived a noble Brahmin, called Jnaana Siddha. He

Realising that the last moments of his mother’s life were
approaching, Karma Siddha asked her to let him know her last
wishes. She requested him to immerse her ashes in the river Ganga.
He promised him to immerse her ashes in the river Ganga. He
promised to do so. Pleased, she breathed her last a little later.
Carrying his mother’s ashes, and accompanied by a servant,
Karma Siddha went to Varanasi, where he was the guest of a
Brahmin.
The Brahmin householder released the calf to be suckled by
the cow, but the calf would not leave the udder, even after it had its
fill of the milk. So the Brahmin had to pull it away mercilessly. By
mischance the calf stepped on the owner’s foot. He beat the calf
with a big stick. Milking the cow, the Brahmin took the milk in a
vessel and went into his home.
Karma Siddha who witnessed the scene was distressed. He
saw how the cow was pained to see the calf punished. She spoke
to the calf: “Child, all that the Brahmin wants is my milk. He doesn’t
care about our mutual love. I must teach him a lesson by killing his
son early next morning. Tomorrow is the auspicious seventh day of
the bright fortnight of the month of Vaisakha. Since I caused the
death of the Brahmin child, I too must bid farewell to my own life.
During the last stages of my life you must also accompany me. I am
doing all this to let people realise that we are not dumb beasts and
that we must not be treated as such.”
Karma Siddha heard this with utmost concern.
The next day, the Brahmin householder left for another town,
on business, and entrusted the job of milking the cow to his son. No

220

221

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

sooner had the boy gone near her than the cow pierced him, despite
the calf’s protests, to his death.

Later the elephant came, pulled away the serpent from the image,
anointed it with the water, and worshipped it with the lotuses and
the Bilva leaves it brought.

Hearing the cries of the bereaved mother, the neighbours tried
to beat the cow. They cow and the calf ran away and jumped to
their death into the Reva river, near the Nandikesvara pilgrim centre.
Karma Siddha, who followed the escaping cow and calf, saw
the tragic scene sorrowfully. As he was thinking over the whole
tragic incident, goddess Ganga appeared before him and said:
“Today is an auspicious day. All those who are merged with the
Reva river today are assured of Liberation.”
Karma Siddha immersed his mother’s ashes in the river, and
took a dip in it later. The disembodied spirit of Sugnunavati blessed
her son, before ascending to heaven.
Remembering the story of the sanctity of the Reva river and
the Nandikesvara Tirtha, Karma Siddha returned home.

BHAKTA KANNAPPA
In South India, on the banks of river Suvarnamukhi, lies the
pilgrim centre Kalahasti. Here is consecrated the ‘Kala Linga’, which
represents the Nature (tattva) of touch and smell, and which was
there from the beginning of time.
Every day that Siva image is worshipped by a spider, a cobra
and an elephant. The spider spins flowers for the worship of the
Linga; the serpent would clean the idol with its hood and decorate
it with the ‘Jewel’ in its hood; and the elephant would fetch the pure
Suvarnamukhi water with its trunk and anoint the image with it.
Thus several days passed by.
One day the serpent, besides wiping the cobweb, actually
crushed the spider with its hood. Then it released the ‘diamonds’ in
its hood, and made up and umbrella with the same hood, to cover
the Linga devotionally and surround it with the rest of its body.

The vengeful snake leapt on to the elephant’s trunk and stung
it fiercely. Simultaneously the elephant pulled the snake down with
its trunk and crushed it under its foot. Thus all the three devout
creatures died at one and the same time.
Impressed by their devotion to Him, and sorry for their mistaken
zeal which caused their mutual destruction, Lord Siva revived them
all at once. He asked them to seek from Him any favours they
wanted. They said that all that they want was that He would stay
there, assuming their collective name besides enabling them to forget
their mutual animosity. Since then, Lord Siva has been protecting
the devotees there, under the appellation ‘Kala-hasti-isvara’.
Near this pilgrim centre is a tribal village, named ‘Udumuru’.
The tribal chief had a son named Tinnadu. He is in the habit of killing
the wild animals and offering them as food for his people.
As usual, one day Tinnadu went ahunting. He killed many
animals. One wild boar escaped his arrow; so he began chasing it.
The animal fled some distance and then suddenly disappeared. The
tired Tinnadu rested under an Asoka tree. As he dozed off, he saw
in a dream a Yogi, who resembled Lord Siva, and who advised him
to worship the Lord of the Universe, whose image was inside a
valley on the banks of a sacred river nearly.
Waking up, Tinnadu went in search of the Lord of the Universe
whose image is in a nearby valley. As soon as his eyes fell on that
holy idol, tears of rapture dropped down his cheeks. Realising that
his life was sanctified, he fell prostrate at the feet of the image, and
thus addressed it: “Lord, why are you dwelling here amidst the wild
beasts that roam about this valley? Have you no friends and relatives
to take care of you? Who will fetch you water when you are thirsty,

222

223

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

and feed you when you are hungry? This is no place for you, where
people cook the animal food. Come along with me to Udumuru,
where I will nourish you with honey and other gentle food.”

When Tinnadu arrived and offered the victuals, as usual, the
Lord did not receive them. As he keenly observed the idol, he saw
that from one of the Lord’s eyes tears were streaming down. He
thought the reason why Siva had not accepted the food was the
incidence of the tears. As the tears continued, even after he mopped
them up and applied a piece of cloth, heated by his warm breath, to
it, he dropped some herbal medicine into the Lord’s eyes, as a
result of which the tears did not stop but actually increased in their
flow. Since all external aids failed, Tinnadu thought fit to pluck out
his own eye and fix it on to the Lord’s tearful one.

When there was no response, Tinnadu repeated his request
and told the Lord that he would not stir until his request was complied
with. Still no reply from the idol, and still Tinnadu was determined
not to leave the place until his wish was fulfilled. He sent away the
people who came in search hunted a wild boar. He made victuals
art of the dead animal, and insisted on the Lord’s eating them.
The Lord made no response as yet. Tinnadu repeated his appeal,
saying that he would die if his request is unheeded.
At last, convinced by the forlorn and fervent wails and appeals
of the devotee, Lord Siva appeared before him and said: “Tinna,
don’t cry. I will accept the victuals. Get up!”.
Since then, every day Tinnadu had been feeding the Lord with
the victuals he prepared.
When the priest went to the temple, with the sacrament and
the water for consecration, he saw the remnants of the meat-food.
So he addressed the Lord: “Lord, why did you tolerate this sort of
desecration from some sinner? Why didn’t you punish him suitably?”
As he received no reply from the Lord, he said: “If you do not
reveal the identity of this heretic, so as to enable me to punish him
duly, I will kill myself in your presence here and now.”
Then Lord Siva came into his presence and told him: “Although
his method of devotion is not in accordance with the scriptural
instruction, his devotion as such is unimpeachable. He is Tinnadu.
Just see how truly devoted he is for he will be presently offering me
his consecrated victuals and you will realise why I gladly accepted
his offerings.”

The tears from the already-disabled eye ceased to flow, but,
strangely, the other eye began to drop tears. So Tinnadu plucked
out his other eye, and unmindful of the gushing blood, attached it to
the Lord’s second eye. Now blinded, Tinnadu verified with his hands
whether the tears from both eyes of the Lord stopped or not. As he
felt that there were no more tears, he danced with joy, and the
celestial regions reverberated with the sound of divine drumbeats.
Lord Siva reinstated Tinnadu’s eyesight.
The priest, who witnessed all these proceedings from behind a
tree, ran up to the Lord’s image and bowed to Him. The Lord told
Tinnadu: “Verily you sacrificed the organ of utmost important (‘sarvaindriyaanaam nayanam pradhaanam’). I appreciate your
uncompromising devotion, and that is why I gave you back your
eyesight, after testing your will power.”
Tinnadu fell prostrate at the Lord’s feet in grateful
acknowledgement and with reverential self-abnegation.
The priest and Tinnadu were then asked by the Lord to seek
whatever they wanted. Both said that all that they wanted was to
have their minds entirely and all the time fixed on Him. Siva granted
their wish, embraced them fondly and immediately disappeared.
Till the end of his mortal life, Tinnadu ceaselessly worshipped
Lord Siva, and in the end was spiritually united with Him.

224

Siva Puranam

BHAKTA NANDANAR
In Tamilnadu is a village, named Aadanooru, wherein lived a
Vedic scholar, Visvanatha Dikshita. He lived up to all the six duties
of a good Brahmin. He and his wife, Sausilyavati, were great
devotees of Lord Siva.
Visvanatha had a large landed property. He had many serfs.
Once he wished to go on a pilgrimage. He then spoke to one of his
two most faithful Harijan servants, Govind, who, along with his sonin-law, Kandasami, was conscientiously looking after Visvanatha’s
agricultural activities: “Govind, I am not yet favoured by Lord Siva
with children. So I hope that if I visit the holy places like Varanasi I
will be blessed with progeny. Till my return, please take care of my
financial interests. I am leaving tomorrow on my pilgrimage.”
As Govind quietly expressed his assent, Kandasami added:
“We assure you that your landed interests will be safe in our hands.
But I have a simple request, sir. I am too poor to be able to journey
to Varanasi. Kindly, therefore, pray to Lord Visvanaatha, on my
behalf also, and beg Him for me to favour me with a son.”
His master said: “I appreciate your request and admire your
devoted spirit. I will send you to Varanasi after I finish my own
pilgrimage and pray for you.”
Visvanatha and His wife at last reached Varanasi, and after
performing the consecration and the anointment to Lord Visvanatha,
Vishvanatha said: “Lord, my life is sanctified by my seeing Thine
image. Thou hast granted me riches, but not progeny. I beseech
Thee that Thou favour me and my servant, Kandasami, with sons.”
Thus, after several days of prayer and entreaty, Visvanatha
saw Lord Visvanatha in his dream one night, who assured him that
he and his servant would before long be blessed with children.
Finally offering his prayers to Lord Visvanatha and goddess
Visalakshi, Visvanaatha returned home, along with his wife.

Siva Puranam

225

Thus several days passed by.
The wives of Visvanatha and Kandasami became pregnant.
After nine months both were delivered of male offsprings. The
Brahmin child was named Subrahmanyam; the Harijan child, Nanda.
Subrahmanyam’s ‘Upanayanam’ was duly performed and he
was sent to the Gurukul to learn the Vedas. Because of his raw age,
he was indolent and associating himself with naughty children. He
neglected the Vedic study. Visvanatha was worried about his son’s
evil ways; all his efforts to reform him by hook or by crook were of
no avail. At last, disgusted with the boy’s misbehaviour, Visvanatha
sent him away from his home. Naturally the tender-hearted mother
was distressed. She could not speak against her husband’s wishes,
but prayed to Lord Visvanatha for her son’s quick reformation.
After a while, the parents were greatly disturbed at the lack of
news about Subramanyam’s whereabouts.
Here Kandasami was bringing up Nanda with much tenderness
and affection. Nanda’s manners pleased all the people around him.
He would fulfil his ablution at regular hours, smear himself with sacred
ash, go to the temple of Lord Siva and worship Him regularly. He
serves the fellow devotees, and constantly obeys his parent’s orders.
He feels that all his doings were inspired by Lord Siva and does his
work as an offering to the Lord.
Learning about his good ways, the Visvanatha couple were
much delighted.
Meanwhile, Subrahmanyam arrived in Varanasi. Bathing in the
Ganges and praying to Lord Visvanatha, he went up to a Pundit,
told him all about his former ways, and requested him to guide him
properly.
The Pundit, Jagadish Panda, said: “Dear boy, don’t grieve over
what was past. You can stay here as my guest. I will teach you all
the worth-learning studies. Lord Visvanatha will surely save you
and bless you.”

226

227

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Before long Subrahmanyam became well-versed in all sacred
studies, and began studying Panini Sanskrit Grammer.

Still, Nanda was adamant, and actually started digging the
ground with a fervour greater than that of his friends who followed
suit. By the grace of Lord Siva, not only was the digging of the tank
completed before dawn but it was also automatically filled with
nectar-like water. Nanda took his leave of the Lord and returned
home along with his mates.

Whether at play or during agricultural activities, Nanda was
ever mindful of Lord Siva. His bullocks would plough the fields
without his guidance, and his farm produce was higher than average.
He would feed and otherwise help all the Siva devotees who sought
his patronage.
Nanda’s grandfather, Govinda, was a little worried at the
extreme devotion of Nanda. Even some of the neighbours thought
that Nanda was afflicted with a strange disease.
Thus several days passed by.
In a neighbouring village, Tiruppangaluru, a traditional festival
(Brahmotsava) in honour of Lord Siva was being celebrated. Nanda,
along with his devotee-mates, went to witness it.
In accordance with the guidelines offered by the Saivite
scripture, the sacred bull, Nandi, was consecrated at that place.
Looking at Nandi, Nanda said: “O Nandi, please do not come in
my way. I have been waiting here for a long time, amid the vast
crowds to get a glimpse of the Lord’s holy image.” He could not
realise that the consecrated Nandi could not step aside for his sake.
When Nandi did not move, Nanda addressed the Lord: “O
blessed Lord, at last I was able to see you. Bless me and save me.”
Nanda saw Siva and Parvati in that Siva idol. He began to dance
with rapturous abandonment to the delight of the witnessing adorers.
Eventually he fell in a swoon.
When he regained consciousness, Nanda pressed his friends
to dig a holy tank in the vicinity. All the tools that they had with them
were four nails; so they told Nanda that it was an impossible task
and that unless they returned home before the next morning they
would be displeasing their master, Visvanatha.

Subrahmanyam re-entered his home early one fine morning,
after completing a fruitful stay of twelve years at the Pundit’s home
in Varanasi. At first his parents could not recognise him. When he
explained everything they were immensely delighted, and invited
their friends and neighbours to listen to him, as he expounded his
knowledge.
Everyone was pleased with Subrahmanyam’s success. He
presented gifts to the servants who came to greet him. His parents
realised that it was due to the grace of Lord Siva that he became a
worthy man.
On a certain night Subrahmanyam saw Siva in a dream. The
Lord told him that he would receive instruction from one of his
servants the next day. Subrahmanyam was eager to know who that
servant would be. Next morning he finished his ablution and prayers
early, and was examining his servants with intense care.
Govind then met Subrahmanyam and said: “Sir, my grandson
is ever engrossed in devotional activities, and is unmindful of even
his food. He seldom attends to his diurnal duties, and would not
drive away the birds and beasts that enter our dwelling. We have,
thanks to your father’s patronage, every material need, but this
absent-mindedness of Nanda worries us a great deal.”
Subrahmanyam knew this would be his man. Accordingly, he
went to visit Nanda, who looked like a noble ascetic (Paramahamsa).
Subrahmanyam bowed to him and befriended him. Both devotees,
who gained their powers through Siva’s grace, since then began

228

229

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

offering prayers to the Lord together. The old-fashioned Visvanatha
chided his son for befriending a Harijan like Nanda(nar). But
Subrahmanyam continued to be friendly with Nanda.

incarnation of Lord Siva. The priest is giving them the sacred waters
and the holy sacrament, in return to the devotional offerings of theirs.

Once Nanda wanted to visit the ‘Ardraa-darsana’ (seeing the
Ardra star) festival consecrated to Lord Nataraja at Chidambaram,
and sought the permission of Visvanatha for that purpose. Visvanatha
ridiculed him and disallowed his request. Nanda then said that he
would rather die than stop paying his devotional respects to Nataraja.
Visvanatha said that since the harvest time was approaching, Nanda
would be failing in his duty of attending to the farming needs, However,
as a challenge, Visvanatha further told him that if Nanda could get
the harvest ready for reaping the very next day, he could go on his
pilgrimage.
Nanda accepted the challenge and placed the burden of fulfilling
his wish on Lord Nataraja. As he woke up next morning, finished
his prayers to Lord Siva, and then went to his farm, he saw that the
harvest was ready for reaping. He thanked the Lord for His grace,
and, getting the harvesting done by his people, sent the produce to
his master’s home. Visvanatha saw that the produce was double
that of the previous year’s. Realising that Nanda was a genuine
devotee of God, Visranatha allowed him to go on the pilgrimage to
Chidambaram.
Lighting the sacred candles, Nanda went along with his friends
and comrades to Chidambaram. Subrahmanyam, unwilling to risk
his father’s angry disapproval, did not accompany Nanda.
Ah, there you see that splendid Chidambara-kshetra! There
you hear the chimes of the temple-bells ringing inspiringly! There
you see a sea of devotees, whose waves of devotional hymns
dedicated to Lord Siva overwhelm the minds and hearts and souls
of the hearers!. The Jangama devotees are smearing the visitors
with sacred ash and are receiving gratefully their gifts. All the hordes
of devotees are lining up to get their glimpse of Lord Nataraja, an

However, Nanda(nar) and his mates were refused entry into
the temple, under the pretext of their ‘untouchability’ as Harijans.
Nanda did not want to protest or quarrel with the temple authorities,
but was simply performing the Siva Bhajan, along with his friends.
All the devotees who heard his inspired and evocative singing were
moved by his melodious and sonorous voice, and were surrounding
him affectionately. The priests regretted their folly, as the Lord opened
their eyes to the universality of divinity immanent in all creation.
Consequently, they gladly offered Nanda and his mates all the
sacramental foods. Nanda and friends accepted them as direct
presents from Lord Nataraja.
The same night Nataraja appeared in a dream to the priests.
(“Sahasra-archaka-sreni) and said: “Nanda belongs to the highest
order of ascetics. He is one of my dearest devotees, and if you
deny entry to him and his mates into the sanctum sanctorum, I will
leave this temple and join him and his men.” Thereupon the priests
asembled in a group, and after careful consultation, agreed to allow
Nanda and other Harijans into the temple.
Here Nanda was unable to sleep, although his mates were
dozing off, on that night. He continued to supplicate Lord Siva all
night and said that, unless he was granted direct Darshan the next
morning, he would put an end to his life. After the long supplication,
Nanda fell in a swoon.
When he regained consciousness and opened his eyes, he saw
before him the repentant priests. He told them that his Lord was
inviting him and asked them to take him to the divine presence. The
priests told him that they would willingly take him into the sanctum
sanctorum, because they realised that he was one of Nataraja’s
supreme devotees.
Nanda’s complexion was suffused with divine splendour, and
he was chanting the songs dear to Siva, as he walked into the temple.

230

231

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

The priests showed him the various halls consecrated to Siva and
Parvati. By his entry the temple itself seemed to be gaining in
resplendence, and Nanda was witnessing the godly idols with eyes
half-closed in rapture. At last Nanda(nar) caused the sacred flame
at the feet of the Lord to flare up ecstatically and consume him. The
priests who saw the gloriously touching scene were astounded. After
the flare quitened down, they saw no trace of Nanda. They rightly
concluded that great devotee became one with Lord Siva, both
spiritually and physically. They sang the praises of Nandanar with
appropriate devotion and delight.

Kubja married the daughter of the Chola king. Her name was
Vanitesvari. Kubja returned the Chola kingdom to his father-inlaw. By giving several rich gifts to Kubja, the Chera king also regained
his kingdom from Kubja.

The news of Nanda’s supreme union with the Lord reached
his native village. On hearing it from the mates of Nanda, Visvanatha
was regretful of his former negligence, Visvanatha and others went
to meet Govinda, who, along with his son and daughter-in-law, was
grieving the loss of Nandanar. Visvanatha consoled them: “You are
indeed blessed people. The fruit you received from one incarnation
of Siva, Visvesvara of Varanasi, is now accepted by another
incarnation, Nataraja. Nanda is a supreme devotee and an ornament
to the whole Harijan race. You must all follow in his footsteps and
be worthy of him. Thereby you too can become one with the Lord.”
Subrahmanyam was sorry to lose his bosom friend. But at last
he understood the true significance of Nandanar’s communion with
God, and, marrying a chaste and good lady, became the father of
worthy children. He instructed several others in the ways of God.

At the time of sending Vanitesvari to her husband’s home, the
Chola king offered Kubja the services of his minister Kulabandhana,
who accompanied her. Leaving the care of the kingdom in the
capable hands of Kulabandhana, Kubja was spending his time
happily in the company of his wife. Everyone was happy with the
able administration of Kulabandhana, who saw to it that the kingdom
knew no want or poverty.
Thus several years passed by.
In the meantime many Buddhists entered that kingdom. They
converted Kubja to their faith. Insulting Hinduism, he even went to
the extent of inviting and patronising Buddhists from all corners of
the world. He stopped the customary consecration to the presiding
deities of his kingdom, goddess Minakshi and Lord Sundaresvara.
He had forbidden the smearing of holy ash and the wearing of the
Siva-rosary by his people. The people were terrified, and were
even hesitating to go to the temple of Minakshi and Sundaresa, for
fear of being molested by the king’s men.

TIRU JNANA SAMBANDHI GURUS

Kubja paid no heed to the wise counsel of his queen and his
minister. He was wholly infatuated with Buddhism. He ordered his
queen and his minister also not to worship Siva in any form. When
they threatened that they would commit suicide if forbidden the visit
to the Siva temple, he allowed it to them, but still forbade them the
use of the sacred ash and the Siva-rosary.

Satrusasana Paandya was ruling the kingdom of Pandya. A
brave man, he conquered the kings of Chola and Chera, and
incorporated their kingdoms into his. When he died, his son Kubja
Pandya succeeded him to the throne.

Once there was drought in the Pandya kingdom. As the queen
and the minister were talking about the best way of bringing the
king round to his original love, Hindusim, a great Saivite, Sivananda,
arrived there and was duly honoured by the queen and the minister.

Govinda, Kandasami, and their kith and kin also were
reconciled to the loss of Nandanar and followed his example, by
becoming great devotees of Lord Siva.

232

Siva Puranam
Sivananda narrated the following story:

There is a place called Brahmapuram in the Chola country.
There lives a great devotee of Siva, named Siva Yogi. By the grace
of Lord Siva, he had a son. When the boy was five years old, he
was one day taken along by his father to the nearby river. Asking
the boy to wait on the bank, Siva Yogi went to bathe in the river.
Siva and Parvati, who were flying above in the sky happened
to see the boy. As Parvati was impressed by the boy’s good looks,
she ordered that the airplane touch down the earth near where the
boy was seated. Parvati caressed and suckled the child, before
saying: “Child, you will learn in no time the Vedas and the Sastras.
You will be known as Jnana Sambandhi Guru, and will disseminate
the knowledge about Lord Siva on all sides. I am now presenting
you with a golden throne, a pearl-studded white canopy, a golden
staff, a pair of precious fans, and a palanquin, pot and tumbler made
of fine gold. Accept these and go round the world, equipped with
them.”
So saying she disappeared rightaway.
When he returned from his bath, Siva Yogi was surprised to
see his little son seated on a pearl-studded throne and surrounded
by rich belongings. Learning the news from the child, Siva Yogi
thanked the Lord and His consort mentally.
The boy started the Vedic studies in right earnest, and before
long went about the country refuting the Buddhist teachings, with
his own well-reasoned arguments in favour of Hinduism. Unable to
withstand his word-power, the Buddhist preachers fled the Chola
country. The news of their flight, and of the victorious efforts of
Jnana Sambandhi Guru, reached the Pandya country.
The queen and the minister were delighted, and sent an invitation
to the Guru to visit the Pandyan kingdom. Accepting the invitation
with pleasure, the Guru arrived in Madhura, accompanied by some

Siva Puranam

233

sixteen thousand disciples. The visitors took a dip in the Vegavati
river, prayed to Minakshi and Sundaresa, besides worshipping Lord
Ganapati in the first place.
Meanwhile Vanitesvari and Kulabandhana came there, and,
praying to the Guru with golden flowers, explained to him the current
situation in their kingdom, because of the King’s Buddhist learnings.
She requested him to reform her husband. The Guru promised to
do his best.
One of the saints of Madhura, named Vagisa Siva Yogi, invited
the Guru to his monastery. The Guru and his disciples were provided
with all their requirements by the queen during their stay in the
monastery.
Kshapana Desika, learning about the Guru’s visit and its
purpose, performed a voodoo rite (abhichaara homa) aimed at killing
the Guru and his retinue. The fire that was produced by that ritual
calmed down before reaching the Vagisa Math. So the Desika
repeated his rite with greater fervour. This time the flames were
coming near the monastery. The disciples requested the Guru to
divert them in such a way as to cause the ill-health of the king. And
so the flames turned into a disease-causing factor in the palace.
Unable to withstand the pains of disease, the king sent for his
queen and his minister. He also had his personal physicians attend
on him, but to no purpose. The Buddhist priests tried all their
traditional remedies on the king, in vain. In his wretched state of
mind, he requested the queen and the minister to throw him into
some river.
The two then told him: “A great Yogi, Jnana Sambandhi Guru,
has arrived in this town. He can cure you of your malady. If you
agree, we will send for him.”
The Guru was sent for by the King, and came there with all his
paraphernalia and retinue. He asked the King to smear himself with

234

235

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

the sacred ash, but the former refused to do so. Then the Guru
asked the Buddhist priests to cure the king and added that if they
failed they had to embrace Hinduism. The King also promised to
re-embrace Hinduism if the Buddhists could not help him. When
they failed, they were asked to go away by the king. When the
Guru applied the sacred ash to the King’s body, the latter was
instantaneously cured.

waters, whereas that of the Guru reached the shore and shone like
a bright lotus.

The King then said: “Revered Guru, you saved me. Initiate me
in Siva worship and take me as your disciple.” After the initiation of
the five-lettered Mantra, and the smearing of the sacred ash, the
King not only was free from his fever but also gained a taller stature
(he was known to be a ‘Kubja’ pigmy till then), He told the Guru: “I
will do thy bidding.”
At the suggestion of the Guru, the King himself decorated his
queen and his minister with the sacred ash and the rosary. The Guru
changed the King’s name as “Sundara Pandya” (handsome Pandya),
now that he was no longer short and ugly.
Sundara called upon his people also to take up the special
worship of Lord Siva. Everyone was praising the Guru. Jealous of
his fame, some of the Buddhist priests sent a message to the King
to this effect: “We will send a palm-leaf script with our Mantra.
Please ask the Guru to prepare a similar one with his Mantra. Then
throw the two scripts into the flames. The writer of the script which
is not burnt will be the winner.”
The Guru wrote ‘Siva’ on a similar palm-leaf. The courtiers
checked the two palm-leaf scripts and when they were consigned
to the flames, the one written by the Buddhists was burnt but not
the Guru’s. Accusing the Guru of practising a ‘fire-stopping’ cult,
the Buddhists then suggested another competition: ‘The two palmleaves, each written by the Buddhists and the Guru, will be thrown
into the river Kaveri, and that which is not drowned will give the
victory to its writer’. The script of the Buddhists was lost in the

Sundara Pandya ordered a golden palanquin for the Guru, who
was then led in a procession round the town. The Guru was also
requested to be seated on the King’s throne. As he did so, he was
presented with valuable gifts by the king and the queen, after they
prayed to his feet in the traditional Hindu style. Later the royal couple
arranged the worship of Sundaresvara and Minakshi with a hundred
thousand lotuses and ten million Bilva leaves. They also gifted the
temple with a golden palanquin and other golden things and
ornaments used in the worship of God.
Once again Hinduism flourished in all its glory in the Pandya
kingdom.
By the grace of Parvati, Jnana Sambandhi Guru remained ever
a five-year-old godly child. It is said that he was the incarnation of
Kumara Svami.

BHAKTA SIRYALA
In the town of Kanchi (Conjeevaram) there lived a great Siva
devotee, Siriyala. Every day, after his prayers to Lord Siva, he would
entertain, as his luncheon guests, six fellow Saivite devotees. Even
if one of the six men would not turn up on any day, Siriyala would
refrain from eating his lunch. His wife, Sangalavva, was his kindred
spirit. They had a son, named Seeraalu, who took after his parents
in every respect. The boy learnt all the sacred studies from a worthy
Guru.
Thus several days have gone by.
One day, after the daily prayers, Siriyala saw that none of his
luncheon guests has arrived. Searching for some other guests in the
street, he came across, an old monk, who was dressed like a typical
Saivite mendicant. He was none other than Lord Siva, who came in
disguise to test the worth of His devotee.

236

237

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Pleased with the appearance of the monk, Siriyala said: “Today
none of my usual guests has come. I cannot eat my food unless I am
surrounded by guests. You have come like a godsend. Please come
to my home and accept my humble hospitality.”

As his mother called out his name thrice, Seeralu Siriyala
appeared before them readily. Pleasantly surprised at that miraculous
reappearance of their dead son, the couple fell prostrate at the feet
of the guest. Lord Siva assumed His real form and congratulated
the trio on their devotion, singling out Sangalavva for this special
praise: “Lady, you have, by allowing the sacrifice of your only son,
proved yourself to be greater than Paulomi, the mother of Jayanta;
Aditi, the mother of Vamana; Sarasvati, the mother of Kasyapa and
other sages; Lakshmi, the mother of Manmatha; and Parvati, the
mother of Kumara Svami and Ganapati.”

The old mendicant replied: “I admire your devotional spirit
and sense of hospitality. But I will accept your invitation, only if you
will serve me the flesh of a young healthy man.” Undeterred, Siriyala
said: “I have an eight-year-old handsome son. I will kill him and
have his flesh cooked for your meal. Believe me and follow me to
my humble home.”
When they reached their destination, Siriyala informed his wife
about the condition. She realised that Lord Siva was thus testing
them. When she informed their son about the human sacrifice, Seeralu
told her: “Mother, I am indeed lucky, because the Lord is pleased
to seek my flesh for His food. I am ready to be sacrificed.”
The Siriyala cut his son into pieces and cooked a meal with
them. He invited the old guest to partake of it. When the old man
finished his bath and sat for the meal, he saw the head of the boy
was missing and complained about it to Siriyala. Siriyala said that it
was only because he thought the hairy portion of the head would be
unsuitable for eating that he did not include it in the food. Upon
which the false guest asked Siriyala and his wife to sit beside him
during the meal. When the couple complied with his request, he
further asked them to invite their son to the meal. Siriyala said that
they had only one son, who was already killed for the preparation
of the guest’s food. Angered, the guest threatened that he would
leave the food untasted, if the boy is not invited to join them. Siriyaala
once again expressed his helplessness, and Sangalavva wept aloud
for their inability to call forth the dead son.
Then the guest said: “Mother, don’t cry. Just call your son
thrice by name. If he does not turn up, we shall discuss the next step
later.”

Afterwards, to the accompaniment of the singing and dancing
of the Pramatha hordes, Siva took along with him the three devotees
to Kailasa.

DRAVIDA MANIKYA SACHIVAS
There is a village named Vatapura, near Madhura, the capital
of Pandya kingdom. There lived a worthy Brahmin, who performed
the Upanayanam of his son when the latter was five years old. The
boy was then trained in Vedic learning. By the time he was sixteen,
he learnt not only the scriptures but also foreign languages, art and
music. He was, further more, dedicated to the worship of Lord
Siva.
Hearing about the boy’s great learning, the king of the country,
Arimardana, invited him to his court and asked him to be his minister.
Accepting the invitation, the boy in due course rose to the rank of
the Chief Minister. By stream lining the administration for the greater
benefit of the king as well as his subjects, he won the admiration
and affection of both the ruler and the ruled. By way of thanks, the
king ceded to him the village of Vatapura and offered him many
precious gifts, which included mighty horses and gigantic chariots.
The king and the minister were mutually devoted.
The Chief Minister is in the habit of finishing his ablutions in the
Suvarna Padmini river, worshipping Lord Siva and then inviting

238

239

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

deserving guests for the luncheon. He would also arrange for the
feeding of the poor and needy every day.

writing poetry and acquiring true knowledge. Investing the minister’s
speech with spontaneous fluency, the Guru named him “Manikya
Vachaka”.

When he became a strong young man, he married a worthy
Brahmin girl. The couple were living happily together.
Once the king’s horses died of a mysterious fever. Then the
king requested the chief minister to acquire suitable substitutes,
without counting the cost.
Next day, as usual, the chief minister finished his ablution and
worship. Later he addressed Lord Siva in the temple thus: “Lord,
hither to I could not fulfil the needs of all Thy devotees, for want of
funds. Now the king is prepared to spend any amount of money for
the purchase of horses of noble breed. I beseech Thee to take care
of the king’s request, so that I can divert these funds for the patronage
of Thy poor devotees.”
On an auspicious day the chief minister set out on his errand,
accompanied by his retinue and equipped with large funds. He first
came across a Brahmin, who offered him the sacred ash, saying
that it would bring him good luck. Thanking the Brahmin, he and his
party proceeded eastwards.
Before long, they reached the pilgrim centre, Bhuvanesvara.
The chief minister was enraptured at the sight of the presiding deity,
Bhuvanesvara, and decided upon staying on there for the duration
of the month of Aashadha (June-July), at the end of which period
he told himself that he would try to acquire worthy horses for the
king. He sent back some of the retinue to Madhura.
One day when he was proceeding towards the Bhuvanesvara
temple, he happened to see a great Guru surrounded by thousands
of pupils. They were all being taught the Vedas, with appropriate
intonation (svara). The chief minister saw Lord Siva in the Guru and
saluted him. The Guru was pleased with the obedience of the minister
and initiated him in several esoteric mantras as well as the skills of

Later the Guru said that he had to go away on some business
and entrusted to him the job of teaching his myriad disciples. Taking
upon himself the responsibility of attending to their needs, the chief
minister expended on them some of the funds the king gave him for
the purchase of new horses. He also sent some funds to Madhura
for the embellishment and upkeep of the Minakshi-Sundaresvara
shrine.
Learning about the latest development, the Pandya king was
wild with fury, and straightway sent a message to the chief minister
to return home immediately, along with the horses. Reading the
message, the irresolute Manikya Vachaka thus prayed: “Lord
Sundaresvara, I have received a message from the king, which I am
unable to obey, because I have not a penny with me. I spent all the
funds on good deeds and on the works dedicated to you. Now you
are my sole refuge.”
Then an aerial voice was heard saying: “O Manikya Vachaka,
write a letter to the Pandya king not to trust rumours, but to construct
the stables in readiness for the arrival of the horses, which would be
brought by you before the end of two months.”
Manikya did so. But still he was worried. That night
Sundaresvara appeared in a dream to him and asked him to return
to Madhura, promising that He would eventually send the horses.
Accordingly, Manikya went back to Madhura and requested the
king to await the arrival of the noble horses. The king trusted him
and presented him with a diamond necklace.
Manikya then bathed in the Padma lake, and going to the
temple, prayed to Ganapati, Kumara svami, Minakshi and
Sundaresvara, beseeching them all to see that his promise to the

240

241

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

king would be duly fulfilled. The aerial voice again assured him that
he would not be disappointed. Pleased, he went home and invited
thousands of Brahmin guests for dinner.

noble horses to Madhura. They transformed their foxes into horses
and brought them; Lord Siva also changed his bull into a stallion,
and accompanied the horses, riding on it.

Manikya’s relatives alerted him that it was not right to spend
the royal money in this fashion and that if the horses would not turn
up he would be the butt of the king’s anger.

The streets of Madhura were reverberating with the sound of
the marching horses, and the dust they kicked up was rising up to
the skies. The riders of the multi-hued horses got down and entered
the court of the Pandya king, flourishing their dazzling swords and
armours. On seeing them, the king was awed and asked Manikya
Sachiva to introduce to him the chief representatives of the horseriders. Manikya replied: “Your Majesty, I have no idea. When your
men were torturing me, I worshipped Lord Siva. Then the leader of
the horse-riders came to me. I informed him of my position and he
promised to do the needful. I cannot even say who the leader of the
horse-riders is.”

Manikya told his dependants: “Please do not worry on my
account, I am now completely detached from my worldly bonds. I
am just waiting to fulfil my promise to the king. Once the horses
arrive, I will leave for the forest to devote the rest of my life doing
penance dedicated to Lord Siva.”
Next day the king called the minister and said: “Manikya
Sachiva, when are you expecting the horses?”. The chief minister
replied: “In two or three days.”
Gladdened, the king ordered that the streets of Madhura be
well-decorated in preparation for the arrival of the noble horses.
Similarly, visitors from other countries were eagerly staying on in
expectation of feasting their eyes on the sight of the mighty horses.
True to the kingly tradition (of rewarding those that please them,
and punishing the same people when they displease them), the king
ordered that the minister be imprisoned, tortured and killed if the
horses would not turn up at the end of the third day.
When actually the horses did not come on the stipulated day,
Manikya was imprisoned. As he was being tortured, he supplicated
the Lord that he should be saved from the pain and ignominy of his
predicament, in as much as he did not squander the royal funds on
any unworthy cause but spent them for doing the works dear to
God.
At last the heart of Sundaresvara (Lord Siva’s incarnation)
melted. He commissioned his Pramatha hordes to bring down the

But the king pressed the minister further, to try and recognise
the leader.
When Manikya was still hesitating, Lord Sundaresvara, in the
form of the chief horse-rider, came upon the scene. Looking at his
radiant form, the king was dazzled and went forward to greet him
obediently.
The ‘horse-rider’ said: “O king, your chief minister is a noble
devotee. He gave me the funds you entrusted him with. You punished
him needlessly. Anyway, what is past is past. Now that you are in a
position to appreciate the greatness of your minister and expiate
your sin of getting him tortured, I assure you I can give you any
number of horses or any amount of money you may want from me.”
The king said: “Sir, I do not really know who you are. I don’t
need any money. Just give me the horses to augment the power of
my cavalry. Thereby I can conquer my enemies, and then ruling the
country without any harmful opposition I can make it fertile and
feed all my subjects. I am sorry I had my minister tortured in my

242

243

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

ignorance of his true worth. Now, please explain to me the traits of
the best breed of horses.”

Manikya was unshackled. Returning home, he bathed and then
worshipped Lord Sundaresvara and other dieties gratefully.

When the leader did so, the king was much delighted and gave
him and other horse-riders several rich gifts. The leader and his
followers then went to the Sundaresvara Minakshi temple and
disappeared there and then.

As the king was looking for the men to do something to prevent
the waters flooding the whole town, not one came in sight. He asked
the single available man to cry out for the building of a wall against
the flooded river. As the town was about to be submerged in the
river waters, the king realised that it was retribution for his getting
Manikya tortured. So he sent for Manikya and apologised to him,
at the same time asking him to save the town and the town people
from a watery grave.

The king rewarded the minister suitably. The people who saw
the horses were greatly impressed by their grand looks.
Manikya returned home and entertained several Brahmin guests
to dinner.
That very night, the horses returned to their original shape of
jackals. They began wailing and committing other acts of nuisance
natural to them. Consequently, the citizens were disturbed in their
sleep. When they opened their house-doors to see what was wrong,
the jackals ran away. The jackals hurt the horses that were formerly
in the stable.
Learning the news, the king was angry, and, thinking that it
was all the plot of the minister, sent for him. When Manikya came
before him, the king said that unless he would bring back the horses
or refund the funds, he would again be tortured and killed.
Manikya said that he was innocent; that he was prepared to
return the gifts the king gave him; and that he would face with
equanimity whatever treatment the king was going to meet out to
him.
The hard-hearted king turned a deaf ear to Manikya’s plea
and ordered his men to torture him. During the torture Manikya
prayed to Lord Sundaresvara for succour. Thereupon the Lord
ordered the Vegavati river to inundate the entire city of Madhura.
The soldiers who were torturing Manikya ran to their homes to
protect their families from the flood. By the grace of Sundaresvara,

Manikya took along with him the king to the temple and prayed:
“Lord, I spent all the royal funds on the deeds dedicated to Thee.
Under the wrong impression that I misused them the king punished
me. All our human follies are dictated by our natural delusions and
illusions. Forgive the king and myself, and save our town and our
people.”
The Lord said: “The king should know that the money he has
under his control is not really his but given to him by God for the
protection of the people. Now that he realises that fact, I will spare
him. I wanted to punish him for his folly. He came to his senses. So
I order the river Vegavati to recede to its former position.”
After the king and the minister offered their obeisance, the
Lord disappeared. The Vegavati river quietened.
All the relieved people offered their thanksgiving prayers to
Sundaresvara and Minakshi.

GRAND MINISTER BASAVESVARA
In the Karnataka country, in a Brahmin hamlet lived a pious
Vedic scholar named Mandrenga Madiraju. His wife was named
Madamba. They had no children. Madamba performed the
‘Nandikesa’ consecration (vrata-vow) for that purpose.

244

245

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Lord Nandikesvara entered her womb in one of his aspects.
But she was not delivered of a child, even after the regular nine
months’ gestation. Undeterred, the good couple continued to pray
to Nandi and to the good deeds like entertaining worthy guests at
lunch offering them the food dear to Nandi.

Lord Siva. The five tufts of the hair, left after shaving the head on
that occasion, the staff, the G-string, the deerskin, and the like, are
part of Lord Siva’s external paraphernalia. You must respect our
family tradition, even if you have no personal conviction in this
matter.”

Unable to bear the burden of the fetus any longer, Madamba
supplicated Nandi for deliverance. He appeared to her in a dream
that night and assured her that soon a male child would be born to
her. Accordingly, a son was born to her when an auspicious star
was in the ascendent. The child was given the customary purificatory
bath. Lord Sangamesvara then entered the child’s room and, after
smearing the child with sacred ash, decorating him with the Siva
emblem (linga) and initiating him in NAMAH SIVAYA mantra, He
instructed the elders to offer the child the nourishment which is first
conscecrated to Lord Siva.

But Basava was adamant and reiterated that the initiation he
already had in the ways of Siva worship was enough for him. He
added that if his father did not see eye to eye with him, he was
prepared to leave him. As he was actually getting ready to leave his
parents accompanied by his sister, Nagamba, his maternal uncle,
Bandari Balideva, the commander-in-chief of King Bijjala, came
forward to receive him, and took his nephew and his niece to his
home.

On the eleventh day after the birth of the child, his naming
ceremony was performed with traditional dignity and decorum, and
he was christened ‘Basava’.
When Basava was five years old he was sent to a Gurukul
where he studied all temporal and spiritual branches of learning.
When he was eight years old, his parents wanted to perform his
Upanayanam. Then the boy said: “You know that Lord
Sangamesvara initiated me in all the sacred duties. I don’t see any
reason for further consecration or for serving other Gurus.”
Madiraju replied: “What you say is true, no doubt. But you
see the traditional ceremonies have to be performed duly in all cases.
Upanayanam is a mandatory ceremony for all Dvijas, whether they
want to enter the life of the householder or become ascetics, later
on. The Gayatri Mantra which is taught to the child during this
ceremony, starts with ‘AUM’, which is the ‘Pranava’ that is sacred
to all orders of life. The ‘Bharga’ term in that mantra represents

Now Basava was sixteen years old. He was now a strong
youth. Although he was thinking of nothing or nobody else but Lord
Siva, he was now of an age when marriage was part of his mundane
duty. So he married a thirteen-year-old daughter of his uncle. The
wedding was well-performed and well-attended.
Receiving the blessings of the elders, Basava, accompanied
by his wife and his sister, went to pay his respects to his Guru at
Kappadi Sangamesvara pilgrim centre. They bowed to Lord
Sangamesvara, from outside the temple, by falling prostrate. The
Lord showed them the way, assuming the guise of an ascetic.
Enraptured, Basava praised the Lord, through scriptural hymns.
When Basava offered all the sacred oblations, Sangamesvara blessed
him and taught him the ways and means of Siva worship, before reentering the idol. All those who witnessed that sublime scene were
devotionally impressed by the grace of God.
Basava and the two ladies stayed on for some time at that
pilgrim centre. All those, who heard him speak about the glory and
grace of Lord Siva, became his disciples.

246

247

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Meanwhile, Bandari Balideva died at Kalyanapura. Regreting
his death, the Bijjala King asked his advisers if any of the relatives
of the deceased was fit to succeed him. To which the advisers replied
that the nephew of the dead commander-in-chief was even greater
in every respect than his uncle, and, therefore, should be invited to
take the place of Balideva.

Satisfied with the sincerity and intensity of Basava’s devotion,
Allama Prabhu said: “Basavesvara, your spirit of devotion is
matchless. I am now giving you this ‘Prasada’ which will make you
invincible and grant you double of whatever you wish for. You can
withstand the onslaught of your foes and the ‘Jangamas’, with the
aid of this sacrifical offering”. So saying, he disappeared.

Although the Bijjala King was a Jain, he heard with satisfaction
the Saivite virtues of Basava, as recounted by the advisers, and
willingly sent for him.

One night burglars tried to break into Basava’s home and steal
all his valuables. But they couldn’t manage to get in. So they wore
black brinjals, as though they were the ‘Linga’ of Lord Siva, and
were awaiting a chance of breaking in. Meanwhile they were
observing the worshipping habits of the Rudra hordes inside the
mansion. Before long the brinjals round their necks turned into real
Siva Lingas. Besides, the devotion for Lord Siva was automatically
generated in them. They too took part in the communal Siva worship.
Realising their true conversion, Basava rewarded them plentifully.
They were ashamed of their former evil ways, and since then became
staunch Saivites, as well as the disciples of Basavesvara.

Getting the king’s message, Basava arrived in Kalyanapura
along with his wife, his sister and his pupils.
He was received with honours, as befitting a future
commander-in-chief.
When offered the post of the ‘defender of the nation’,
Basavesvara assured the king that Lord Siva would protect them
all, if they merely placed their trust in Him, and that he would make
the king the lord of the whole world eventually.
The king then took Basava to Balideva’s home. Basava offered
his condolences to the relations, and later took charge of his
approtioned duty with apt skill and dedication. He rose above the
distinctions of caste and the order of life, and taught the all-embracing
philosophy of the Upanishads to one and all.
Hearing about the glory of Basavesvara, the incarnation of Siva,
Lord Allama, went to meet him, with a view to giving him His
blessings in person.
Basava received and worshipped the divine guest with due
traditional honours. Lord Allama ate up the consecrated food
(Prasaadam) meant for one hundred and ninety thousand people,
as it was being devotionally offered to Him. Not a morsel of the
oblation remained. Having no other go, Basava offered himself to
Allama, asking to be eaten by that Lord.

One day a Siva devotee requested Basava to supply him ten
tons of pearls, in order to prepare the pearl-powder for the
decoration of a Siva shrine. Even as Basava glanced at the heap of
corns before him, it was transformed into a mound of pearls. Basava
asked the devotee to take them all.
On another day a ‘Jangama’ devotee came and asked for as
much wealth as was in the king’s treasury, and Basava readily fulfilled
his wish. The king’s men informed him about Basava’s gift. On being
sent for and asked for an explanation, by the king, Basava said that
the money that was given to the Jangama was not from the royal
treasury, and asked the king to check up. When the king opened
his treasury and saw the funds intact, he apologised to Basava.
Once an amorous youth, engaged in the love-play with several
courtesans, sent one of the maids of the bawdy-house to fetch a

248

249

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

‘nitya padi’ from Basava. As the maid was getting it from Basava’s
place, she saw the bright silk saree which the wife of Basava was
wearing, and, going home, incited her mistress to ask Basava for
the garment of his wife. Basava agreed without hesitation to give
away the rich raiment. As Gangamba, the wife of Basava, was
removing the saree she wore, to give it away to the courtesan, a
fresh saree appeared again and again in its place all of which were
also ceded to the young lover to be presented to the courtesan.

to him about the misdeed of the king. The mother of the minister
advised him to kill the Bijjala King. Thereupon the two injured men
and the minister went to the court of the king and cut off his head.
None of the king’s men could resist the three men, who gained their
strength from their righteous indignation.

One day the Lord of Kappadi, Sangamesvara, came to Basava
in the form of a Jangama (mendicant) and asked for his third eye.
Realising that it was Sangamesvara in disguise, he asked the guest
to go and look at himself in a mirror. As the ‘Jangama’ did so, there
appeared his third eye in its usual place. Sangamesvara was ashamed
of himself for trying to test such a staunch devotee as Basava. As he
was trying to disappear, Basava told Sangamesvara: “Lord, how
can a devotee of Thine prove himself to be a lesser person than
Thyself? Thou art one without beginning and end, and all those who
devotionally identify themselves with Thee become Thine equals.”
Smiling in approval, Sangamesvara disappeared.
Basava was also able to fulfil his promise of making King Bijjala
the emperor of the whole world.
Thus several days passed by.
The Bijjala King in course of time lost his regard for Basava,
and caused the eyes of two of the latter’s devotees to be plucked
out, even though they were not guilty of any crime. Angered at this
treacherous act, Basava left the court of Bijjala King with the resolve
of seeing his end, and went to the temple of Sangamesvara at
Kappadi along with his family and his devotee-mates like Madivala
Machayya, Moliga Marayya and Kinnera Brahmayya.
In the meantime, the two blinded men, Mallayya and
Madhupayya, went to meet the minister, Jangadeva, and complained

Later the three heroes went to Kappadi and reported to
Basavesvara all that transpired, after praying to Lord Sangamesvara.
Basava was relieved to know that the purpose of his birth on
earth was fulfilled now. So, deciding ot leave the earth and be united
with God, he told Sangamesvara: “Lord, my mission is over. Take
me!”
Lord Sangamesvara smilingly received him into His Spirit and
both of them finally entered the Siva Linga.
All those who saw that sublime scene felt that their lives were
sanctified and returned home, singing the praises of Sangamesvara
and Basavesvara.

PANDIT MALLIKARJUNA CHAKRAVARTI
On the banks of the river Godavari is situated the pilgrim centre
Draksharamam. The presiding deity of the place is Lord Bhimesvara.
The priest of that temple is Bhimaradhya, of the lineage of Gautama.
Childless, he was constantly uttering the name of Lord Siva,
NAMAH SIVAYA.
Once he visited SriSailam, and there in the presence of Lord
Mallikarjuna was chanting the five lettered Mantra (NAMAH
SIVAYA). Pleased with his devotion, the Lord granted that his wife
be pregnant. In due course she gave birth to a male child, who was
named after the Lord that granted his birth ‘Mallikarjuna’. He was
sent to the Gurukul at the age of five, and his Upanayanam was
performed when he was eight. Even as a child, he mastered all
temporal and spiritual studies. That was why the honorific prefix,

250

251

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

‘Pandita’, was added to his name by the people at large. Leaving
for Kotipalli, he took the ‘Vira Saiva’ vow from the Guru,
Visvaradhya.

good work, he did not quite apprecitate the latter’s liberal views to
the effect that all that matters is devotion but not the system of caste
or the order of life (Varna-asrama-Dharma). Still, the two great
devotees respected each other.

Mallikarjuna was in the habit of praying to the Lord during all
his waking hours, and in patronising and honouring the fellow Siva
devotees. Some people who were jealous of his piety and fame,
started scoffing at the devotees who were displaying the external
marks of a Saivite like wearing the Linga-locket and smearing the
body with the sacred ash. Then Mallikarjuna called an assembly of
wise men, and convincingly explained the need for the external
symbols and other practices of the Saivites. Consequently, many of
the assembled men became his disciples.
Later Mallikarjuna started travelling over the regions
surrounded by the rivers, Godavari, Krishna, Tungabhadra and
Kaveri in order to propagate the ideals of Siva cult.
Once Mallikarjuna went to the forest to fetch the flowers and
the fruits for the consecration to Lord Siva. As he was returning
home, he ran across a Vira Saivite (extreme devotee of the Siva
cult), named Mahadevayya. The latter, without noticing it, set his
foot on a flower meant for Siva worship. Thereby he felt guilty of
sacrilege and cut off his foot. Seeing his piteous state and admiring
his extreme devotedness to Siva, Mallikarjuna, returning home,
gathered a bit of oil from the lamp lighted in the presence of Lord
Siva’s image, and applied it to the leg of Mahadevayya. The leg
was healed and the foot was set in its proper position. Mahadevayya
bowed to Mallikarjuna’s feet. The children of Mahadevayya also
expressed their admiration to Mallikarjuna and became his ardent
disciples.
When he finished his task of propagating the Saivite ideals
travelling on foot, from place of place, he set them in the form of a
book SIVA TATTVA SARAMU (The essence of the Siva entity).
Although he heard with pleasure the reports about Basavesvara’s

Once a Buddhist preacher, accompanied by a thousand
followers, entered the Andhra country. In the village of Chandavolu
he converted the potentate, Velanati Choda, to Buddhism. He also
boasted that the Vedic faith was wrong and that he would defeat
the Saivite tenets in a battle of wits. When the potentate informed
the preacher about Mallikarjuna, the Buddhist requested the Choda
to send for the Saivite leader, so as to enable him to defeat the latter
in an argument.
When the debate was arranged, the Buddhist started it thus:
“The Vedas have no proper or sacred authority. There is no Creator
of the world. The creation comes, and ceases to be, of its own.
There is neither rebirth, nor heaven and hell, nor vice and virtue.
The only religion is Non-violence (Ahimsaa).”
Uttering a silent prayer to Siva and Parvati, Mallikarjuna
retorted: “The Vedas are self-evolved, like the inhalation and
exhalation of God. They are eternal. They are needed for the
edification of the populace, who have to know what they should
and should not do. Just as there is no effect without cause, there
can be no creation without the Creator. Even an atheist cannot deny
his own existence: God is the Existence behind all existence, because
it is and axiom that out of pre-existing life comes life and that nothing
comes out of nothing. They who deny the existence of God do so
only out of ignorance. The product of Knowledge is the self identity
with the Universal Self or the Eternal Source God. An ignorant,
mortal being like man cannot by himself be the source of creation,
any more than can the clay turn itself into a pot without the aid of the
potter. The essence and existence of God can be demonstrated by
any authority of the scripture or of logic; that is, direct perception or

252

253

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

indirect inference. As the Chandogya Upanishat puts it: “Sat eva,
Saumya, idam agre aaseet” (Pure Existence, only was before this
creation). The process of creation, preservation and destruction,
followed by re-creation, is the function of an Essence which
transcends the limited powers of the individual creature. That
primordial essence and existence, which is God, is at the root of the
powers of volition, action and knowledge which motivate and
animate the human individual. If there were no rebirth or former
birth, we cannot explain the differences in the children of the same
parents or the ill-luck of virtuous people and the good luck of vicious
people. So stop your atheism, accept the existence an of allpervasive, all-merciful God and save yourself before it is too late-- for you do not know when again you will get this human birth, in
which alone is there the freedom to act knowingly, to pick and
choose.”

poisonous juice poured into the sockets. Then Mallikarjuna cursed
the king that he and his clan would perish.

As such wise words fell from the learned lips of Mallikarjuna,
the Buddhist Guru found himself speechless. The judges awarded
victory in the debate to Mallikarjuna.
The Buddhist Guru escaped. Going to the seashore, he made
arrangements for the performance of voodoo rites (Abhichara
Homa) to kill Mallikarjuna indirectly. Learning about this plot, the
disciples of Mallikarjuna, Remaya and Rechaya, went to the
Buddhist Teacher and cut off his head. On being queried about the
justice of his disciples’ action, by the king, Mallikarjuna justified the
murder. Upon which, the king said that it would be equally just on
his part to kill Mallikarjuna. Then Mallikarjuna replied that he would
kill himself before being killed by the king. So saying, he cut off his
head, and yet the head would rejoin the trunk. Then he plucked out
his two eyes; the eyes also went back to their original position, All
those who saw that miraculous scene were astounded.
And yet the fire of the king’s anger was not quenched. He
asked his men to pluck out the eyes of Mallikarjuna, and had

Later Mallikarjuna left for Amaravati pilgrim centre, where he
recited the ‘Amaresa’ hymn extemporaneously. Lord Amaresa was
pleased with his prayer and granted him his full eyesight.
All the people praised the devotional spirit of Mallikarjuna.
The Velanaati Choda king and his clan perished.
With the idea of meeting Basavesvara, Mallikarjuna left for
Kalyanapura. On the way he stopped for a while in a village, named
Irugudumula. Hearing about his arrival there, Basava sent him the
sacred ash as a token of goodwill. By accepting that gift, Mallikarjuna
was instantaneously able to learn the Kannada language. So he
incorporated some hundreds of Kannada verses into his Telugu
publication, SIVATATTVASARAMU. From Irugudumula, he
reached the village of Panuganti, where there was a great Siva
devotee, named Dhavalesu Namayya.
Some jealous people carried false tales about him to the ruler
of that country. Without properly judging the truth or otherwise of
the reports, the ruler ordered the killing of Namayya. Without waiting
for the king’s men to carry out the execution, Namayya himself cut
off his head. Immediately he was united with Lord Siva.
Learning about this incident, Mallikarjuna soon left that village
and went to a village named Vanapuri, near Kalyanapura. There he
learnt about how Basava himself joined the spirit of Lord Siva at
Kappadi Sangamesvara pilgrim centre. Mallikarjuna lamented his
inability to see the corporeal form of Basava.
Thereafter he reached Srisailam, walking from a nearby forest
up to the steps of the sacred shrine there. As he saw the templetower, Srigiri, he found in it the symbol (Linga) of Lord Siva.
Therefore he hesitated to step on the Srisailam hill with his feet.

254

255

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Accordingly, he commissioned one of his disciples, Dosayya, to go
and pray to Lord Mallikarjuna and goddess Bhramaramba on his
behalf also.

When Malhana was twelve years old both his parents died.
Malhana later went to his maternal grandfather to learn Kanada’s
Vaiseshika system of philosophy, Panini’s Grammer and the Alankara
Sastras. He was now eighteen years old, handsome, strong and
exuberantly young.

Lord Mallikarjuna met Dosayya half-way, in the guise of an
old hermit, and had shown him around the shrine including the image
of the Lord at the top Sikharesvara; the idol of Lord Mallikarjuna;
the Sakti symbol of Bhramaramba; the idols of Sakshi Ganapati, of
Viresvara and His consort, of Hatakesa, and of Sarangesvara; the
Yantra of NAMAH SIVAYA; the Mallika Kundam; the Patala
Ganga; the Linga Ghat; the Siddha cave; the Bilva and the other
four gardens; the five Mathas; the miraculous trees, the shining
creepers, the magic touchstone (sparsa-vedi) and other worth seeing
sights. Dosayya felt that his existence was sanctified. He offered his
prayers at the feet of Lord Mallikarjuna and took his leave of the
old ascetic.
Returning to the presence of his Guru, Dosayya reported all
that happened to him in and around the shrine. Mallikarjuna felt that
his own life-purpose was served thereby, and addressed Lord
Mallikarjuna to receive him into His Supreme Spirit. Accordingly,
Lord Mallikarjuna and goddess Bhramaramba received the
Mallikarjuna couple into their innate symbols - Linga and Sakti.
Dosayya informed the son of Pundit Mallikarjuna about the
incidents at Srisailam. The son performed the last rites to his parents.
He lived in the noble tradition of his noble father. Dosayya was
advising him in every desirable manner.

One day he, along with his friends, went to worship the Lord
in the town’s Siva shrine. After finishing the prayers, he was sitting
in the Mandapa. At that time there arrived the sixteen-year-old
daughter of the town’s chief courtesan. She played the Mohana
Raga on the Veena, and held the audience spellbound with her
musical skill. As she was leaving the temple, she glanced sideways
at Malhana, who, along with his mates, was one of the audience
that was moved by her artistry. Their eyes met.
Returning home, Malhana was restless. He could relish his food
or sleep well. Her friends realised the state of his mind and were
inwardly laughing at his absent-mindedness. When his grandparents
wanted him to marry a girl of his own caste, he said that he was not
yet prepared to get married. So the elders left the decision to himself.
One day a friend of his took Malhana to the home of the
courtesan. The chief courtesan took them inside and asked them to
be seated. Then she asked her daughter to come and bow to
Malhana and his friend. Introducing her, the mother said: “Gentlemen,
this is my daughter. She is named Pushpagandhi. She is well-versed
in music and the arts. She is now of marriageable age. I am on the
look out for a suitable husband.”

POET MALHANA

Then Malhana’s friend smilingly said: “My friend is a rich
bachelor. He loves your daughter and will gladly make her mistress.”

In Aryavarta country, a wealthy Brahmin parents had a son
late in life. He was named Malhana. Performing his Upanayanam
when he was eight years old, the parents sent him to the Gurukul.
He soon learnt all the sacred studies.

The old courtesan said: “Sir, many princes and merchants
wanted to marry this daughter of mine, offering many rich gifts. But
I refused them all. Now I see that my daughter is also pleased to
meet this handsome friend of yours. So I am willing to offer her to

256

257

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

your friend.” So saying, she placed her daughter’s hand in Malhana’s.
Malhana’s friend, feeling that his task was finished, quietly left the
place. Malhana placed a bundle of golden coins in Pushpagandhi’s
hands. She handed it to her mother.

sensual pleasures. Desire increases with its enjoyment, like the fire
into which the clarified butter or any other oily oblation is poured.
So now bid farewell to the physical joys and find your unending
bliss in the service and worship of God.”

Then the girl led him to the bedchamber, which was already
furnished with the customary articles prepared for the nuptial night.
The young couple spent the whole night in tender and ardent loveplay. Early next morning Malhana unwillingly left Pushpagandhi and
returned home.

The wise counsel of Pushpagandhi opened the eyes of Malhana,
who readily uttered this prayer:

Thus several days passed by, with Malhana spending the nights
in Pushpagandhi’s company. The wise words of his grandparents
could not convince him of his folly. He squandered all his property
on pleasing Pushpagandhi.
One day when Malhana, now poor, visited the bawdyhouse,
with bare hands, the old courtesan asked him what sort of a gift he
had brought to her daughter. When he protested that he already
gave his all to her daughter, she said: “Which girl will enjoy the
company of a poor man? If you do not get out of this house right
now, I will ask my servants to kick you out. Go!” Pushpagandhi,
still in love with Malhana, wanted to stop her mother’s threats. But
the old woman asked her to go inside and stop talking nonsense.
As Malhana was shamefacedly returning home, Pushpagandhi met
him through the backdoor and asked him to meet her at the Siva
shrine at a certain hour in the evening.
When they met at the temple she explained her position
regretfully, adding that the world would not appreciate his marriage
to a courtesan. So she said she would render any help she asked of
her, before they part from each other.
Malhana said he could not think of anything
Then Pushpagandhi said: “Friend, you enjoyed my company
for twelve years. There is no contentment in the enjoying of the

Kaantaa-kacha-prachaya-pushpa-sugandhi-gandha
lubdha-bhramat-bhramara karbura kandharaaya,
Gandharva-Yaksha-Sura-Siddha kirita-koti
sanghatta ghrishta charanaaya NAMAH SIVAAYA.
(I bow to Lord Siva whose neck is of the rich hue of the bee
which, excited by their perfume, flocks on the flowers that adorn
the braids of lovely women, and whose feet are pressed by the
crowns of the saluting devotees like Gandharvas, Yakshas, Suras
and Siddhas.)
Pushpagandhi was glad that her advice found ready response.
Malhana was extemporaneously composing the devotional hymns,
as Pushpagandhi was putting them on paper. Thus he recited thirtysix verses. His devotional spirit now became firm. Thankfully
escorting Pushpagandhi to her home, Malhana thereafter lived in
the ways of God, and finally became one with Lord Siva.
When Pushpagandhi returned home, her mother introduced
her to two rich lovers, of whom she was free to choose the one she
liked better. Pushpagandhi said: “Mother, I have no more use for
money. I have deserted all the cravings of the flesh. My mind is now
dedicated to Lord Siva. I am going to be a nun in the service of
God. If you force me into the old evil ways, I will certainly hang
myself before dawn.”
The mother could not come in the way of her beloved daughter.
Eventually Pushpagandhi was also united with Lord Siva in
spirit.

258

259

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

The reading or hearing of the sacred story of Malhana and
Pushpagandhi is conducive to self-realisation, besides being a worthy
illustration of devotion to Lord Siva.

give this Siva Linga to Munja Bhoja, the local ruler. Propagate the
Vedic religion and release the Gandharvas from My imprecation.
You must leave this godly form of yours and go in human shape to
Varanasi, and appear there as one born supernaturally (outside of
the mother’s womb) in the presence of Lord Visvesvara, My direct
image there. You will then assume the ‘Gotra’ of Bharadvaja and
marry a chaste daughter of Brahma. You will be blessed with worthy
sons who will be the rulers of Mudigonda principality, as well as the
‘world-teachers’ who will ever strive for the propagation of the
Siva cult.”

UDBHATARADHYA GURU
On the lovely Silver Mountain, Kailaasa, Siva and Parvati were
strolling in the pleasure garden. Picking the beautiful flowers, Siva
was decorating the tresses of Parvati with them. At that juncture a
group of Gandharva men and women, fromAlakapura, landed there
and were making much noise. Nandi, the constant companion of
Siva, warned them to go elsewhere, because the divine couple were
enjoying together the beauty of nature in its quiet splendour. The
Gandharva women neglected the divine Bull’s warning, and
continued to go towards the bush where Siva and Parvati were
sporting. Thereupon Siva cursed them to be born as sprites. As the
women were transforming into witches, the Gandharva king,
Chitraratha, fell at the feet of Lord Siva and begged, on behalf of
the Gandharva women, to forgive them.
Lord Siva said: “Sir, the effects of predestination must be
experienced. Anyway, there is a place called Sallaki; let these sprites
go and occupy a banyan tree there and from there cause affliction
to the good people of that place. Keep eating the meat of animals.
My ‘mental child’, Udbhata, who will be the Guru of the king of
Sallaki, will come there. By feeling the smoke of his body’s heat
you and your women will be freed from my imprecation.”
Chitraratha and his retinue, accordingly went to Sallaki, and
remaining under the shadows of the Banyan tree were awaiting the
arrival of Udbhata.
One day while Lord Siva was meditating on how to release
the Gandharvas from His curse, a part of his energy took the shape
of a boy who was His exact image. The boy bowed to the Lord’s
feet and asked for His orders. Siva said: “Go to the town of Sallaki;

When the boy went to Varanasi, Lord Visvesvara spoke from
His image to the priests and the assembled devotees: “Gentlemen,
this boy is Udbhata who is born to propagate the religion of the
Upanishads and to save the sinners. Please arrange his wedding to
some deserving girl and accept him as your Guru so that you and
your posterity will ever be blessed.”
Miraculously the boy appeared there and then as a six-yearold. A good Brahmin took the boy to his home and got him well
educated. When Udbhata came of age he was married to the
daughter of another good Brahmin, Subuddhi.
Learning about the arrival and progress of Udbhata, the King
of that holy city paid the noble youth his respects and offered him
rich gifts.
Udbhata started lecturing daily, in the temple of Lord
Visvesvara, about the exclusive worth and importance of the Saivite
religion. By virtue of his great teachings, many worthy devotees
were converted to the Siva cult and saved themselves from eternal
damnation thereby.
Once Udbhata, accompanied by his disciples, went to Kashmir,
where at the court of King Jayapida he taught the essence of the
Upanishads to the assembled men and women. Receiving many

260

261

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

gifts from the king, he visited several other principalities on his way
back home, performing the same function of the teacher of the
Upanishadic wisdom to the masses of willing listeners.

innate ignorance, and thanked Udbhata for his gracious initiation.
Udbhata said: “It is due to the good works done in your former
births that you have cultivated greater love for Lord Siva than for all
your kingly and familiar possessions. The best period to be initiated
into the coterie of Siva worship and to wear the ‘Linga’ are the four
lunar months of Asvayuja, Kartika, Margasirsha, Phalguna, Vaisakha
and Jyeshtha. The month of Magha is only of middle merit for that
purpose; the other five months have only a lowly merit. The period
of the eclipse, both of the sun and of the moon, is beneficial. Equally
auspicious are; bright fortnight; the fifth day of the dark fortnight;
the time when the stars, Rohini, Mrigasirsha, Pushyami, Punarvasu,
Hasta, Anuraadha, Uttara-phalguna, Uttara-aashaadha, Mula and
Revati are in the ascendant; and the ‘fixed’ constellations. Proscribed
are the periods when the constellations are ‘on the move’ and when
it is the fourth or the sixth or the eighth or the ninth or the fourteenth
or the fifteenth day of either fortnight.”

Udbhata’s wife eventually gave birth to a son, who was named
Mallikarjuna Guru. Mallikarjuna, who proved himself, to be a worthy
son of a worthy father, authored a scholarly Sanskrit work, called
‘Kaavya Alankaara Sangraha’.
Meanwhile, the ruler of Sallaki, Pramatheswara, visited
Varanasi and worshipped Visvesvara, along with his wife. The Lord
appeared before the royal couple and assured them that if the queen,
Prabhaavati, ate the fruit. He was giving them she would soon be
with child.
In due course Prabhaavati became pregnant and was delivered
of a son, who was christened. ‘Bhoja’.
Bhoja followed in the footsteps of his father. He married two
worthy girls, Matta and Kasini. He spread his kingdom far and
wide, by virtue of his valour. When his father grew old and left
Varanasi along his mother, Bhoja succeeded to the throne. Then he
kept waiting for a good teacher who would initiate him in the Siva
cult.
One early morning, Lord Siva appeared before him and said:
“O king, thirty days from now my ‘mental child’, Udbhataaraadhya
will arrive in your court and instruct you the method of wearing the
Siva Linga.”
Bhoja was waiting for Udbhata’s arrival. When Udbhata came
on the thirtieth day after the Lord appeared before Bhoja, the king
saluted him in traditional reverence. The scholar adorned the ruler
with the sacred ash, uttering the words, “Siva Raksha” (may Lord
Siva protect you!).
Bhoja then gladly acknowledged his long-felt need for the
wearing of the Siva Linga, which alone would drive away man’s

Munja Bhoja, along with his wives, chose an auspicious period
to receive the ‘Linga’ from Udbhata. At the king’s request, Udbhate
and his family shifted to Sallaki. Both the scholar and the ruler did
their best for the propagation of the Siva cult.
As the number of the Saivites was steadily growing, Udbhata
now applied himself to the release of the Gandharvas from Siva’s
imprecation. Accordingly, he took his sacred dip in the river, wore
all the external symbols of Shaivism, and sitting in the highest
transcendent Yogic posture, let his mundane life flow out from him
through his head into the Infinite.
Udbhata’s family and King Bhoja for a while grieved over his
end, and later cremated him according to his last wish. As soon as
the smoke from the funeral pyre touched them, the sprites in the
banyan tree were released from their curse, and, regaining their
Gandharva form, returned to Alakapura.

262

263

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Udbhata’s son, Mallikarjuna, after performing his father’s
funeral rites duly, and firmly establishing over some years the kingdom
of Siva in Sallaki, returned to his native Mudigonda.

requested him to release it. The sheep was in the meantime
approaching Brahmayya and resting at his feet. The lover said that
he would sell the animal for a thousand gold pieces. Brahmayya
readily paid the amount. Leaving the animal behind, the lover went
to meet his mistress.

In due course Mallikarjuna wife gave birth to a worthy son,
who was christened Polana. Since then, the lineage of Polana came
to be known with the surname ‘Mudigonda’, and his descendants
were scattered over the neighbouring villages of Madala, Rentapalla
Medipalem, Dhavalapuri and other places.
Munja Bhoja ruled his people with dedication and finally was
united with Lord Siva in spirit.

BHAKTA KINNERA BRAHMAYYA
Once upon a time there lived in the village of Poduru a great
devotee named Brahmayya. He was dedicated to Linga worship
and his uncompromising devotion was to Lord Siva and Vira Saiva
religion. He loved all humanity. He was well-versed in music, and
played the Vina exceedingly well. He was in the habit of inviting
musicians, hear them sing or play. And he would gift them large
property. Since he used to play the instrument ‘Kinnera’ along with
the invited musicians, he was popularly known as ‘Kinnera
Brahmayya’. His singing, as well as the playing of the instrument,
was to the tune of the hymns dedicated to Lord Siva.

On being asked about his promise of offering her a sheep, the
lover told her all that happened. As he was trying to pacify her by
paying her the gold pieces, she threw them in his face and asked
him to get out of her house, because he was a coward who could
not keep his promise of offering her the sheep.
Still determined to make good his promise, the lover went back
to the temple and wanted to take back the sheep. When Brahmayya
protested that the animal was Siva’s property, the lover threateningly
showed to him a sharp instrument (alugu). Angered, Brahmayya,
snatched the ‘alugu’ from the lover and cut off his head, which flew
out of the temple. Since the trunk of a man who set a naught the
command of devotee of Siva, it was ordered to be thrown out of
the temple immediately.

To pay his respects to Basavesvara, Brahmayya journeyed to
Kalyanapura. Brahmayya was received in traditional style by
Basavesvara; at the latter’s request Brahmayya stayed on there as
his guest.

The relatives of the lover reported the matter to Basavesvara,
who then demanded an explanation from Brahmayya for his ghastly
deed and asked him to prove the truth of his statement that the
lover was a ‘Siva-apostate’. Brahmayya appealed to Lord
Tripurantakesvara to bear him witness. Instantaneously, the noble
sound of ‘AUM’ was heard all over the shrine. When Brahmayya
repeated his request for greater clarification of the Lord’s agreement
with his deed, the incarnation of Siva thrice spoke out ‘yes’.

One day Brahmayya went to the temple of Tripurantaka, and
after finishing his prayers, rested in the main hall of meditation. A
sheep, which was being taken to the home of a courtesan by her
lover, broke loose and was taking shelter in the temple. The lover
searched the temple, found the animal and was trying to take it
away. Brahmayya told the lover that he would buy the animal and

Basavesvara and other devotees were astonished at the efficacy
of Brahmayya’s faith in Lord Siva. They also begged him to bring
the lover back to life. Brahmayya gladly acceded to their request
and brought together the head and the trunk of the lover. Sprinkling
the sacred water mixed with the holy ash over the lover, he said:
“Get up!”

264

265

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

The revived lover bowed to the feet of Brahmayya and sought
his forgiveness.

After a tearful farewell from the people near and dear to her,
Mallamma reached her father-in-law’s home in Siddhapuram safely.

Brahmayya stayed for a few more days as Basavesvara’s guest,
taught about the glory of Lord Siva to the devotees, and eventually
returned home, where he continued his good deeds dear to Siva,
and beneficial to humanity at large.

Hema Reddi is a perfect gentleman, but his wife, Peddamma
is a vixen, in whose hands is the management of the household.
Besides, the sister-in-law (wife of the elder brother of Mallamma’s
husband) of Mallamma, named Nagamma, was jealous of the new
bride’s good looks and accomplishments. While pressing the feet
of her mother-in-law, Nagamma spoke thus: “What kind of a girl is
this new daughter-in-law of yours? What for does she put on that
ash and wear that rosary? This girl’s mother died, and she was
brought up by her father. How can such a woman know the ways
of a good housewife?”

HEMA REDDI MALLAMMA
In a village near the Srisailam pilgrim centre was living a wealthy
householder, named Somi Reddi. He and his wife were gifted by
God with a daughter, in their late life. She was christened, Mallamma,
because she was the gift of Lord Mallikarjuna.
Mallamma was entirely devoted to the worship of Lord
Mallesvara (Mallikarjuna).
When Mallamma came of age she was married to Bhramara
Reddi, the son of a rich respectable citizen, Hemaa Reddi. Although
Bhramara Reddi was uneducated and unwise, Somi Reddi, assured
of the wealth of the family, gave his daughter’s hand in marriage to
him.
At the time of sending Mallamma to her new home, Somi Redi
told Hema Reddi: “Mallamma lost her mother in childhood. I have
been a father as well as a mother to her since then. Now I am
placing her in the hands of your son. You for your part must take my
place to her.”
Hema Reddi assured Somi Reddi that Mallamma would be
well taken care of in her new home and that her father was free to
visit her whenever he wanted.
Mallamma, seeing her grieving parent, assured him that she
would live up to the ideals handed down by tradition and that he
should not be sad to see her go away from her old home, because
a woman’s place is always by her husband.

Later Hema Reddi told his wife that the arrival of the new
bride in the home brought them great good fortune, because that
year the harvest yielded ten times more than the crop of the previous
ten years. Peddamma flared up: “Don’t be hasty in your judgment.
One swallow does not make a summer. Seeing her queer dress and
habits, it would appear that she is not used to household duties. We
must teach her how to be a good housewife.”
Nagamma heard Peddamma’s words with glee, but Hema
Reddi was uneasy in mind. However, he is hen-pecked and could
not chide wife.
Once when Mallamma finished her prayers and offered the
sacramental food and water to her mother-in-law and her sister-inlaw (“co-dauther-in-law”, in Indian English), they refused the holy
offerings and even made fun of her. Mallamma kept quiet, wondering
what sort of predestination was it of theirs they refused the offerings
of God.
Meanwhile Lord Mallikarjuna presented himself in the form of
a Jangama mendicant before the home of Hema Reddi, begging
with the words: “Bhavati, bhiksham dehi” (lady, give me alms).

266

267

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Nagamma scolded the mendicant, saying, “ Can’t you work
for your living? To patronise a strong sturdy fellow like you is a
crime.” Mallamma intervened: “Sister, this Jangama is an incarnation
of Lord Siva. Let us give him a bit of our food, for it is wrong to
deny the needy when we have the means to help them.” Turning to
the Jangama, Mallamma requested him not to take umbrage at the
words of her sister-in-law, and added that she would go in and
fetch him some food. Jangama thanked Mallamma and blessed her
with kind words, which struck Naagamma like arrows. She thought
she was slighted by Mallamma and reported the matter to their
mother-in-law. Peddamma then came on the scene and told
Mallamma, “Who do you think you are? Who gave you the right to
patronise beggars? Have you brought any treasure from your father’s
home that you think you can do whatever you like with our
possessions? Now, listen, you have got some chores to attend to.
Fetch water from the lake. Clean the backyard. Grind the corn.
Take breakfast to the wage-labourers in the fields.”

began hurting, because of the manual labour. She then lamented:
“Lord Mallesvara, I am unable to complete the grinding of this large
quantity of corn, because my fingers have already developed blisters.
Kindly come to my rescue.” As she fell in a swoon, the Lord ground
the whole grain in a trice. Mallamma could visualise the presence of
the Lord and begged Him to stop grinding, for she did not like the
idea of seeing his fingers hurt in the process. When she opened her
eyes, she saw the whole corn ground into flour. She realised it was
the work of God and paid Him her grateful thanks mentally.

Although she was sorry for the folly of her mother-in-law and
her sister-in-law, Mallamma gladly accepted the command of her
mother-in-law, placing her faith in Lord Mallesvara.
Besides performing these heavy duties, Mallamma would daily
serve her innocuous husband in traditional style. If ever her husband
praises her to mother-in-law the old woman would send away her
son, unwilling to hear such nice words.
The husband of Nagamma, the eldest son of Hema Reddi, is
a profligate. He would spend all his time with his mistress and does
not care for his wife at all. He contracted several debtsl and is about
to pledge his portion of the house to raise more money. Naagamma
could not help obey him.
As the two elder women were not allowing Mallamma to eat
her food properly, she was running down physically. Her fingers

Next day also the Jangama came to Hema Reddi’s home for
alms. Mallamma was getting ready to give him a little corn flour. But
the Jangama requested her to give him a full meal. She replied that
she was not free to go to the kitchen to fetch him a full meal. The
Jangama protested that he being all alone and unlearned in the art of
cooking, he had no way of making a cake of the flour. Mallamma
had no choice but to apologise to him for her helplessness. The
Jangama told her that her troubles would soon be over. The flour
disappeared, along with the Jangama.
Nagamma now had a chance of accusing Mallamma with apt
evidence that the latter gave away thirty measures of corn to the
Jangama. When scolded by her mother-in-law, Mallamma protested
that she did not know how the whole flour vanished. But the motherin-law was not convinced, and asked Mallamma to go to the jungle
and look after the cattle. She was just allowed a little gruel by way
of nourishment, when she said she was weak with hunger. She was
given two old sarees and further ordered by the mother-in-law to
stay on in the forest, because she did not deserve to stay in the
home. Then her husband came there and asked his mother to allow
his wife to stay with them. Peddamma chided him that he was under
the spell of his wily wife. After some more pleading from the man
and some chiding from the old woman, Mallamma was at last forced
to go to the forest. Mallamma bowed to the feet of her husband

268

269

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

before leaving for the forest. She had the mortification of hearing
her mother-in-law say that her husband would be found another
wife; moreover, she was not even provided with footwear for the
journey.

Mallesvara and Bhramaramba with them. Thereby your hard luck
will be gone.”

As she was proceeding towards the forest, a monk, Chidananda
Yogi, who was building a hermitage near Srisailam happened to see
her. He pitied her. She said that she was merely being tested by
God. The monk escorted her to Aalamanda. Near that place is a
tribal hamlet. There lived the ‘Chenchu’ (tribal) couple, Naganna
and Ambamma. One day the husband told his wife that, thanks to
his hunting, with a prayer to Lord Mallesvara, he could easily kill a
lion.
Ambamma asked him not to speak too much but get a fit gift
for goddess Bhramaramba and Lord Mallesvara whose special
festival was being celebrated the following day. Naganna assured
her that goddess Bhramaramba, belonging as she does to their own
tribe, would certainly come to their aid in seeking the victuals. When
asked to accompany him to the forest to see his hunting prowess,
Ambamma said that she had to keep Mallamma company, who
was attending on the cattle.
In the cattle-shed Mallamma was praying to the image of Lord
Siva with Bilva leaves. By then the servant who brought her the
gruel went away. Again Lord Mallesvara came to ask alms of
Mallamma, in the guise of a Jangama. Mallamma recognised the
Lord in him, but said that all that she could offer him was a little
gruel. Seeing her plaintive complexion, the Lord took pity on her.
He asked her why she was staying all alone in the jungle. She
related her whole sad story since birth till that moment. The
‘Jangama’ then said: “Don’t worry, child. Your favourite deity is allmerciful. On the nearby hill is his temple. Go and fetch the sacred
waters from the adjacent ‘Patala Ganga’ and anoint the idols of

As the Jangama said that he would gladly drink the gruel,
Mallamma poured it into his joined palms. He said that his hunger
was gone and that the gruel, on account of her touch, tasted like
nectar. She thanked him ecstatically. But she was not yet satisfied.
She begged Lord Mallesvara to grant her the bliss of seeing his real
figure with her eyes, and threatened that, if he would not agree to
do so, she would break her head against his idol and die.
Then Lord Mallesvara appeared before her in his true form
and said: “Dear devotee, I am touched by your sincere resolve.
You have really brought renown to the families of both your parents
and in-laws. Now seek whatever boon you want from me.”
Mallamma said: “Lord, all that I want is the ability to see you.
My sole wish is to serve you and your consort. Anyway, please
always protect my in-laws, my husband and my other relatives.”
The Lord said: “So be it. I shall receive your alms always in
the form of a Jangama.”
When once Lord Mallesvara went to the home of Hema Reddi,
as a Jangama, Nagamma and Peddamma, in place of alms, gave
him a severe thrashing with a big stick. They even told Mallamma’s
husband, that his wife was having illicit relations with the mendicant
in the jungle, Bharama Reddi was actually given a sickle by his
mother, who asked him to keep the family prestige alive by cutting
off the head of his ‘unfaithful’ wife.
Bharama Reddi went to the jungle, and, standing behind a tree,
overheard the conversation between his wife and the Jangama. As
he realised that his wife was a true devotee of Lord Mallesvara and
that the ‘Jangama’ was none other than that very Lord, his sickle
turned into a golden piece. He fell at the feet of his wife and begged
her to see that he could have the ‘Darshan’ of Lord Mallesvara. At

270

271

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Mallamma’s earnest behest, the Lord appeared before the couple,
and promised them that they would eventually be united with Him in
spirit.

cows. As he did so, the dung turned into gold. Hemaa Reddi thanked
Mallamma for saving the family from penury. She said that she was
only an instrument in the hands of Lord Mallesvara, whose grace
was responsible for the miracle. She suggested that he spends the
gold on paying the debts and on farming. The balance, she added,
could be expended on the renovation of the dilapidated temple of
Lord Mallesvara.

Bharama Reddi then took his wife to Siddhapuram. As usual,
Nagamma and Peddamma scolded them both. The mother-in-law
hit Mallamma with a shoe and asked her not to enter the house.
Mallamma did not retort in any manner. She returned to the jungle,
with the name of Lord Mallesvara on her lips. As her husband tried
to follow her, he was stopped by his mother.
Meanwhile, news reached them that two of their bulls died.
Also their haystacks were burnt. Their debts grew immensely. There
was no stock of grain in the home. The crops were pest-ridden.
Hema Reddi was extremely worried. He asked Bharama Reddi to
bring the golden ornaments in the home. But when the young man
opened the iron safe, no jewellery was to be found in it. Peddamma
and Nagamma began crying, saying that their jewels were stolen by
thieves. When Hemaa Reddi learnt the news, his heart was broken.
But who can change the nature of those two women? All that
Hemaa Reddi could say was that he would go and fetch Mallamma
home from the jungle.
At the time Hema Reddi reached her residence, Mallamma
was awaiting the arrival of the Jangama. When she saw her fatherin-law she greeted him with reverence and inquired about the state
of his health and his farming. Hema Reddi told her about all that
happened to his finances.
Mallamma was grieved to learn the bad news, but she had no
complaints against the two women who were instrumental in
banishing her. She merely said that because of the exile she could
devote her entire time to the devotion of Lord Mallesvara and to
the service of the sacred cows. Then she asked her father-in-law to
get in, pray to the image of Siva and touch the dung of the holy

Mallamma’s advice was accepted by Hema Reddi. He invited
her back to their home. Mallamma said that her duty by the Lord
was her prime consideration. When she wanted the Lord to give
His ‘Darshan’to her father-in-law, He replied that the mind of Hemaa
Reddi was not yet fully purified for such a boon, but He promised,
once the reminder of the wealth he received was spent on restoring
His temple, He would gladly appear before him.
When she conveyed the promise of the Lord to her father-inlaw he was gratified, and for his part promised to spend the money
he could spare on the temple-renovation,
In the meantime were heard cries, “Mallamma, save us
Nagamma and Peddamma fell prostrate at the feet of Mallamma
and begged her to release them from their misfortune. Mallamma
requested them not to bow to her, for she was younger than they.
She actually thanked them, because by her exile she was blessed
with the Darshan of Lord Mallesvara. At that point, Bharama Reddi
came there and scolded his mother and his sister-in-law. Mallamma
told her husband that it was not right on his part to insult his mother
or his sister-in-law, who was the equal of his mother. Although they
all requested her to return home, she said that her place was still in
the jungle, in the presence of Lord Mallesvara.
After a while, there arrived the poet Ranganaatha, who became
blind by praising Vishnu and insulting Siva. When he sought the
pardon of Mallesvara, the Lord granted him sight only in one eye;
for the restoration of sight to the other eye, he was asked by the

272

273

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

Lord to seek the help of Mallamma. By making him drink the water
consecrated to the Lord, she could make his other eye also normal.

pressed with further queries from the boy, the devotee described to
him the shape of the Lord’s image as well as His constant
companionship with goddess Parvati (as earlier narrated in this book).

When the restoration of the temple was completed, Mallamma
accepted the invitation of her in-laws to return to Srisailam.
Mallamma and her husband took a dip in the ‘Patala Ganga’
and presided over the anointing function after the completion of the
renovation of the temple.
After the function, the Lord told Mallamma: “Stay on for a
little while in this place, and spread the message of Lord Siva and
the glory of the Srisailam pilgrim centre on all sides. You are indeed
the incarnation of the bountiful goddess Annapurna. By associating
with you, your husband will gain everlasting reputation as a gret
devotee of mine.”
Later Mallamma worshipped goddess Bhramaramba and
received the blessings of that incarnation of cosmic Energy.
When the consecration was completed duly, she distributed
the food to the multitudes. Every one praised Mallamma for her
piety, virtue, nobility and generosity.

BHAKTA SIDDHA RAMA GOPAALA
In the western part of India, there is a village named
Sonnalaapur, in which lived a shepherd, Muddayya. He was great
devotee of Siva. His wife was Subhangi. By the grace of Lord Siva,
they had a son, whom they christened, ‘Siddha Rama Gopala.”
When he was eight years old, Gopala began his traditional
duties of tending the sheep.
Once he happened to see a large group of Jangama mendicants
proceeding to Srisailam. He was curious to learn where they were
going to. On enquiry, one of the devotees told Gopaala that their
destination was the great resort of Lord Mallesvara, Srisailam. When

Gopala’s curiosity then changed into the actual wish to see
Lord Mallesvara. When he requested the pilgrims to take him along
with them, they tried to dissuade him by saying that such a boy as
he could not walk all that long distance. But Gopala said that he
could walk any distance, and further added that he was prepared
to leave his home and parents to get a glimpse of the Lord. The
devotee who answered his questions was now in a quandary, for
nobody who wants to see Srisailam should be denied that
opportunity; on the other hand, should not take the boy along with
them without informing his parents. Unable to make up his mind,
the Jangama devotee began to proceed on his way. The boy kept
following him. Then the Jangama, Mahesvara, felt that there was no
point in trying to stop the boy. Along the way, he took care of the
boy’s needs like a fond parent. At last all the pilgrims reached
Srisailam, the night before the great festival of Maha Siva Ratri. The
Jangama led the boy to the idol of Lord Mallikarjuna (Mallesvara)
the next morning, and asked him to fall prostrate at the Lord’s feet
in self-surrending devotion.
Looking at the idol, Gopaala turned to the Jangama and said:
“Sir, do you think that I am a fool? How can this stone image be
Lord Mallikarjuna (Siva)? Why don’t I see all those appurtenances
of the Lord which you graphically described to me? Where is His
consort, Parvati? Where is the river Ganga in his hair?”
Then the Jangama replied: “Dear boy, I merely described to
you the living form of Lord Siva. When he has no attributes he
appears in the ‘Linga’ (the symbol of God’s omnipresence). You
cannot see the real Siva with the eyes of the body but you can see
him with your eyes of knowledge. So set aside your doubts and
pray to this great image.”

274

275

Siva Puranam

Siva Puranam

But Gopala paid no head to the Jangama’s advice. He declared
he would not return home till he saw the real form of Lord Siva.
Convinced that it was difficult to persuade the boy, the Jangama
went his way.

If the stranger had not brought me here, I would have been lost
forever.”

Gopala was worried, now that the Jangama left him. He
wondered who would attend to his physical needs of food and
raiment. Then he began to wail: “O Lord Mallikarjuna, I am helpless
in this big jungle. The Jangama who led me here has disappeared.
Take pity on me, a wretched boy who left his home and parents in
the hope of seeing you. If do not show mercy towards me, who
else can save me?”
Taking pity on the boy, Mallesvara appeared in the form of a
devotee-visitor (“Maahesvara”) and promised to render him any
help he needed.
Gopala told him all about himself and his earnest wish to see
Lord Siva in person. The stranger said: “The description of Lord
Siva made by the Jangama is right. Come with me. I will show you
Lord Mallikarjuna who answers to that description.”
The stranger led the boy to the image of Lord Mallikarjuna.
Gopala complained that the stranger was merely showing the same
old idol, which was earlier shown him by the Jangama. Impressed
by the boy’s sincere determination, the stranger said: “Close your
eyes for a while. When you open your eyes you will be also to see
the Mallikarjuna you want to see.”
So saying the stranger disappeared. When Gopala opened his
eyes he saw Lord Mallikarjuna along with His consort,
Bhramaramba.
Gopala cried in ecstasy: “Lord, where hast Thou hidden
Thyself all along? I thank Thee with all my heart and mind and soul
for giving me the supreme delight of seeing Thee with my own eyes.

When Gopala looked behind to see the stranger, there was no
sign of him. Then Lord Mallikarjuna took the boy into his arms,
placed him on His lap and said: “I appreciate your purposeful
devotion. I am that stranger. I am now going to transform your
humble garb into golden armour. I am presenting you with miraculous
sandals and the magic touchstone. You may now seek any boon
you want from me.” Gopaala asked the Lord to go to his native
village along with His consort, so that the natives could pray to Him
daily. The Lord said: “I and my spouse will gladly come there. But
remember, you alone can see us in our real form. The others can
see only our idols.”
Immensely pleased, Gopaala then prayed to the Lord:
Kaarunyaamrita-varshinam ghana-vipat-greeshmacchidaa-karmatham
Vidyaa sasya-phala-udayaaya sumanah samsevyam
icchaa-kritim,
Nrityat bhakti-mayooram adri-nilayam chanchat jataamandalam
Sambho vaanchhati Nila-kantha-dhara! sadaa Tvaam
me manah chaatakah.
(O Lord Siva, always the Chaataka bird of my mind seeks
Thee, who art the showerer of the nectar of grace, the determined
destroyer of the heat of the deepest distress, the fertiliser of the
farm of education, the quintessence of the all-yielding bounty ever
worshipped by scholars, the possessor of the devotion displayed
by the dancing devotee-peacocks, the dweller on the Silver
Mountain and the bearer of the shining hair.)
After gracefully listening to Gopaala’s prayer, the divine couple
disappeared. The boy formally offered his prayers to Ganapati and

276

Siva Puranam

the Virabhadra couple, before putting on his magic slippers which
took him to his wished-for destination of his hometown in a trice.
As his parents embraced him welcomingly, there was heard the
sound of anklets.
That sound, according to the reports brought by the villagers
to Gopaala, denoted the appearnace of a huge Siva shrine on the
outskirts of the village, complete with the images of Lord Siva and
goddess Parvati, and the formation of a sacred lake before that
temple.
Enraptured, Gopala ran up to the temple, followed by his
relatives and the other natives.
Siddha Rama Gopala found his wishes fulfilled. The divine
couple appeared to him personally. The others of the whole village
gathered there, sang and danced of the newly self-installed idols of
Mallikharjuna and Bhramaramba. The temple-bells were ringing
solemnly.
Gopala took a dip in the sacred lake, anointed idols with the
holy waters, and worshipped them with full mind and consecration.
All those who saw the consecration by the installation of the idols,
felt that their lives were wholly sanctified.
As long as he lived in his mortal coil, Siddha Rama Gopala
fulfilled all his duties by Lord Siva devotees, firmly establishing the
glorious on earth. All those who saw and heard him were inspired
by the spirit of Siva.
Thereby was perpetuated the worship the Lord Siva.

OM TAT SAT

